Chapter 1
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
2And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
3And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
4And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.
5And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the
morning were the first day.
6And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the
waters from the waters.
7And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament
from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.
8And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second
day.
9And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place,
and let the dry land appear: and it was so.
10And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas:
and God saw that it was good.
11And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree
yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed isin itself, upon the earth: and it was so.
12And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree
yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
13And the evening and the morning were the third day.
14And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day
from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
15And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and
it was so.
16And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to
rule the night: he made the stars also.
17And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
18And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness:
and God saw that it was good.
19And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
20And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life,
and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.Genesis 1
26Genesis 1
21And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters
brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God
saw that it was good.
22And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas,
and let fowl multiply in the earth.
23And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
24And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and
creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.
25And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every
thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
26And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over
all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
27So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female
created he them.
28And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
29And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which isupon the
face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which isthe fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it
shall be for meat.
30And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth
upon the earth, wherein there islife, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.
31And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the
evening and the morning were the sixth day.
27Genesis 1
Chapter 2
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
2And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the
seventh day from all his work which he had made.
3And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from
all his work which God created and made.
4These arethe generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in
the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,
5And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it
grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man
to till the ground.
6But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
7And the Lord God formed man ofthe dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life; and man became a living soul.
8And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom
he had formed.
9And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight,
and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge
of good and evil.
10And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and be-
came into four heads.
11The name of the first isPison: that isit which compasseth the whole land of Havilah,
where there isgold;
12And the gold of that land isgood: there isbdellium and the onyx stone.
13And the name of the second river isGihon: the same isit that compasseth the whole land
of Ethiopia.
14And the name of the third river isHiddekel: that isit which goeth toward the east of As-
syria. And the fourth river isEuphrates.
15And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to
keep it.
16And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest
freely eat:
17But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
18And the Lord God said, It isnot good that the man should be alone; I will make him
an help meet for him.Genesis 2
28Genesis 2
19And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of
the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
20And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the
field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.
21And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one
of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;
22And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought
her unto the man.
23And Adam said, This isnow bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called
Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
24Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and
they shall be one flesh.
25And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
29Genesis 2
Chapter 3
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had
made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the
garden?
2And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
3But of the fruit of the tree which isin the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
4And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:
5For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
6And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make onewise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat,
and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
7And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they
sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
8And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and
Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of
the garden.
9And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where artthou?
10And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I
hid myself.
11And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I
commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
12And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to bewith me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat.
13And the Lord God said unto the woman, What isthis that thou hast done? And the woman
said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.
14And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou artcursed
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust
shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:
15And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
16Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow
thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall beto thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee.Genesis 3
30Genesis 3
17And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast
eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed isthe
ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat ofit all the days of thy life;
18Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
19In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of
it wast thou taken: for dust thou art,and unto dust shalt thou return.
20And Adam called his wife’s name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.
21Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins, and clothed them.
22And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil:
and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:
23Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from
whence he was taken.
24So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and
a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.
31Genesis 3
Chapter 4
And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten
a man from the Lord .
2And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller
of the ground.
3And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an of-
fering unto the Lord .
4And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord
had respect unto Abel and to his offering:
5But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell.
6And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?
7If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the
door. And unto thee shall behis desire, and thou shalt rule over him.
8And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field,
that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.
9And the Lord said unto Cain, Where isAbel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am
I my brother’s keeper?
10And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from
the ground.
11And now artthou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy
brother’s blood from thy hand;
12When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive
and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
13And Cain said unto the Lord , My punishment isgreater than I can bear.
14Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face
shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass,
that every one that findeth me shall slay me.
15And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken
on him sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.
16And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord , and dwelt in the land of Nod, on
the east of Eden.
17And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and
called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.
18And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael:
and Methusael begat Lamech.Genesis 4
32Genesis 4
19And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name
of the other Zillah.
20And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.
21And his brother’s name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and
organ.
22And Zillah, she also bare Tubal- cain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron:
and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
23And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech,
hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my
hurt.
24If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.
25And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For
God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.
26And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began
men to call upon the name of the Lord .
33Genesis 4
Chapter 5
This isthe book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the
likeness of God made he him;
2Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the
day when they were created.
3And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a sonin his own likeness, after
his image; and called his name Seth:
4And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat
sons and daughters:
5And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.
6And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:
7And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and
daughters:
8And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.
9And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:
10And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and
daughters:
11And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.
12And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel:
13And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons
and daughters:
14And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.
15And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:
16And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons
and daughters:
17And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.
18And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:
19And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:
20And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.
21And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:
22And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat
sons and daughters:
23And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
24And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.
25And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech:
26And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and
begat sons and daughters:Genesis 5
34Genesis 5
27And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.
28And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:
29And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work
and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.
30And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons
and daughters:
31And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.
32And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
35Genesis 5
Chapter 6
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters
were born unto them,
2That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them
wives of all which they chose.
3And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also isflesh: yet
his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.
4There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came
in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men
which were of old, men of renown.
5And GOD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every ima-
gination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
6And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his
heart.
7And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both
man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I
have made them.
8But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord .
9These arethe generations of Noah: Noah was a just man andperfect in his generations,
and Noah walked with God.
10And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
11The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
12And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted
his way upon the earth.
13And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled
with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
14Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch
it within and without with pitch.
15And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of:The length of the ark shall bethree
hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
16A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the
door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt
thou make it.
17And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh,
wherein isthe breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that isin the earth shall
die.Genesis 6
36Genesis 6
18But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and
thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with thee.
19And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to
keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female.
20Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth
after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.
21And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather itto thee; and it
shall be for food for thee, and for them.
22Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
37Genesis 6
Chapter 7
And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have
I seen righteous before me in this generation.
2Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts
that arenot clean by two, the male and his female.
3Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face
of all the earth.
4For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights;
and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
5And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.
6And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
7And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the
ark, because of the waters of the flood.
8Of clean beasts, and of beasts that arenot clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that cree-
peth upon the earth,
9There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had
commanded Noah.
10And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
11In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of
the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven were opened.
12And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
13In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah,
and Noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
14They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird
of every sort.
15And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein isthe breath
of life.
16And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him:
and the Lord shut him in.
17And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the
ark, and it was lift up above the earth.
18And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went
upon the face of the waters.
19And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under
the whole heaven, were covered.Genesis 7
38Genesis 7
20Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.
21And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and
of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:
22All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.
23And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both
man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed
from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.
24And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.
39Genesis 7
Chapter 8
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that waswith him
in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;
2The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from
heaven was restrained;
3And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred
and fifty days the waters were abated.
4And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the
mountains of Ararat.
5And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the
first dayof the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
6And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark
which he had made:
7And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from
off the earth.
8Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the
ground;
9But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark,
for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her,
and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
10And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;
11And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth wasan olive leaf pluckt
off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
12And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again
unto him any more.
13And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first
dayof the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the cov-
ering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.
14And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth
dried.
15And God spake unto Noah, saying,
16Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee.
17Bring forth with thee every living thing that iswith thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of
cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed
abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.
18And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him:Genesis 8
40Genesis 8
19Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, andwhatsoever creepeth upon the earth,
after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
20And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord ; and took of every clean beast, and of every
clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
21And the Lord smelled a sweet savour; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse
the ground any more for man’s sake; for the imagination of man’s heart isevil from his
youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.
22While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and
winter, and day and night shall not cease.
41Genesis 8
Chapter 9
And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the earth.
2And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon
every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea;
into your hand are they delivered.
3Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given
you all things.
4But flesh with the life thereof, which isthe blood thereof, shall ye not eat.
5And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require
it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man.
6Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God
made he man.
7And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply
therein.
8And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
9And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
10And with every living creature that iswith you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast
of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.
11And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by
the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
12And God said, This isthe token of the covenant which I make between me and you and
every living creature that iswith you, for perpetual generations:
13I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the
earth.
14And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen
in the cloud:
15And I will remember my covenant, which isbetween me and you and every living creature
of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
16And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the ever-
lasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that isupon the earth.
17And God said unto Noah, This isthe token of the covenant, which I have established
between me and all flesh that isupon the earth.
18And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth:
and Ham is the father of Canaan.
19These arethe three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.
20And Noah began to bean husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:Genesis 9
42Genesis 9
21And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.
22And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren
without.
23And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid itupon both their shoulders, and went
backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and
they saw not their father’s nakedness.
24And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
25And he said, Cursed beCanaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
26And he said, Blessed bethe Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
27God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be
his servant.
28And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
29And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.
43Genesis 9
Chapter 10
Now these arethe generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto
them were sons born after the flood.
2The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech,
and Tiras.
3And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
4And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
5By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue,
after their families, in their nations.
6And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
7And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha: and the
sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
8And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
9He was a mighty hunter before the Lord : wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty
hunter before the Lord .
10And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the
land of Shinar.
11Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and
Calah,
12And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same isa great city.
13And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
14And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.
15And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
16And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
17And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
18And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families
of the Canaanites spread abroad.
19And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza;
as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
20These arethe sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and
in their nations.
21Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder,
even to him were children born.
22The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
23And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
24And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.Genesis 10
44Genesis 10
25And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the
earth divided; and his brother’s name was Joktan.
26And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
27And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
28And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
29And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.
30And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.
31These arethe sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after
their nations.
32These arethe families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and
by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.
45Genesis 10
Chapter 11
And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
2And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of
Shinar; and they dwelt there.
3And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And
they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.
4And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven;
and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
5And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.
6And the Lord said, Behold, the people isone, and they have all one language; and this they
begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to
do.
7Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand
one another’s speech.
8So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left
off to build the city.
9Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound the language
of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth.
10These arethe generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat
Arphaxad two years after the flood:
11And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
12And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:
13And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons
and daughters.
14And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:
15And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and
daughters.
16And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:
17And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and
daughters.
18And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:
19And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and
daughters.
20And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:
21And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and
daughters.Genesis 11
46Genesis 11
22And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:
23And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
24And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:
25And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and
daughters.
26And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
27Now these arethe generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and
Haran begat Lot.
28And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
29And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram’s wife was Sarai; and the
name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father
of Iscah.
30But Sarai was barren; she had no child.
31And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son’s son, and Sarai his
daughter in law, his son Abram’s wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the
Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.
32And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.
47Genesis 11
Chapter 12
Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred,
and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will shew thee:
2And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and
thou shalt be a blessing:
3And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all
families of the earth be blessed.
4So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram
was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.
5And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they
had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into
the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.
6And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh.
And the Canaanite was then in the land.
7And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there
builded he an altar unto the Lord , who appeared unto him.
8And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent,
having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the Lord ,
and called upon the name of the Lord .
9And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.
10And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn
there; for the famine was grievous in the land.
11And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai
his wife, Behold now, I know that thou arta fair woman to look upon:
12Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This
ishis wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.
13Say, I pray thee, thou artmy sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul
shall live because of thee.
14And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld
the woman that she was very fair.
15The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman
was taken into Pharaoh’s house.
16And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and
menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.
17And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram’s
wife.Genesis 12
48Genesis 12
18And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What isthis that thou hast done unto me? why didst
thou not tell me that she was thy wife?
19Why saidst thou, She ismy sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore
behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.
20And Pharaoh commanded hismen concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife,
and all that he had.
49Genesis 12
Chapter 13
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with
him, into the south.
2And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
3And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent
had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;
4Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram called
on the name of the Lord .
5And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
6And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance
was great, so that they could not dwell together.
7And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s
cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
8And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and
between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we bebrethren.
9Isnot the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take
the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to
the left.
10And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it waswell watered every
where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord ,
like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.
11Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated
themselves the one from the other.
12Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched
histent toward Sodom.
13But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.
14And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now
thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward,
and westward:
15For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.
16And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of
the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.
17Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it
unto thee.
18Then Abram removed histent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which isin
Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord .Genesis 13
50Genesis 13
Chapter 14
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar,
Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;
2That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab
king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
3All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.
4Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
5And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and
smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in
Shaveh Kiriathaim,
6And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which isby the wilderness.
7And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which isKadesh, and smote all the country
of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
8And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah,
and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same isZoar;) and they joined battle with
them in the vale of Siddim;
9With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king
of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.
10And the vale of Siddim was full ofslimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled,
and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.
11And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went
their way.
12And they took Lot, Abram’s brother’s son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and de-
parted.
13And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in
the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were
confederate with Abram.
14And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants,
born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.
15And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and
pursued them unto Hobah, which ison the left hand of Damascus.
16And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods,
and the women also, and the people.
17And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of
Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which isthe
king’s dale.Genesis 14
51Genesis 14
18And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of
the most high God.
19And he blessed him, and said, Blessed beAbram of the most high God, possessor of
heaven and earth:
20And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand.
And he gave him tithes of all.
21And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to
thyself.
22And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord , the most
high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
23That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing
that isthine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:
24Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went
with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.
52Genesis 14
Chapter 15
After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not,
Abram: I amthy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.
2And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward
of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?
3And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is
mine heir.
4And, behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but
he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
5And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars,
if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
6And he believed in the Lord ; and he counted it to him for righteousness.
7And he said unto him, I amthe Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give
thee this land to inherit it.
8And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?
9And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years
old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.
10And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one
against another: but the birds divided he not.
11And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.
12And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of
great darkness fell upon him.
13And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that
isnot theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;
14And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come
out with great substance.
15And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
16But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites
isnot yet full.
17And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking
furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
18In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given
this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:
19The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
20And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
21And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.Genesis 15
53Genesis 15
Chapter 16
Now Sarai Abram’s wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian,
whose name was Hagar.
2And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from bearing: I pray
thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened
to the voice of Sarai.
3And Sarai Abram’s wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten
years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.
4And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had con-
ceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
5And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong beupon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom;
and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between
me and thee.
6But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid isin thy hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee.
And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.
7And the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the
fountain in the way to Shur.
8And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she
said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
9And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under
her hands.
10And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall
not be numbered for multitude.
11And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou artwith child, and shalt bear a son,
and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the Lord hath heard thy affliction.
12And he will be a wild man; his hand will beagainst every man, and every man’s hand
against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
13And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said,
Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?
14Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it isbetween Kadesh and Bered.
15And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son’s name, which Hagar bare,
Ishmael.
16And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.Genesis 16
54Genesis 16
Chapter 17
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said
unto him, I amthe Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.
2And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.
3And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,
4As for me, behold, my covenant iswith thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
5Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a
father of many nations have I made thee.
6And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall
come out of thee.
7And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
8And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger,
all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.
9And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy
seed after thee in their generations.
10This ismy covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee;
Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
11And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant
betwixt me and you.
12And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your
generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is
not of thy seed.
13He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circum-
cised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
14And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul
shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.
15And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai,
but Sarah shall her name be.
16And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be
a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.
17Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born
unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
18And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!
19And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name
Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his
seed after him.Genesis 17
55Genesis 17
20And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him
fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make
him a great nation.
21But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set
time in the next year.
22And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.
23And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that
were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house; and circum-
cised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.
24And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin.
25And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin.
26In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
27And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger,
were circumcised with him.
56Genesis 17
Chapter 18
And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in
the heat of the day;
2And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them,
he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,
3And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee,
from thy servant:
4Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the
tree:
5And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on:
for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.
6And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three
measures of fine meal, knead it,and make cakes upon the hearth.
7And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave itunto a
young man; and he hasted to dress it.
8And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set itbefore them;
and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.
9And they said unto him, Where isSarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
10And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah
thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard itin the tent door, which was behind him.
11Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah
after the manner of women.
12Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure,
my lord being old also?
13And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety
bear a child, which am old?
14Is any thing too hard for the Lord ? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according
to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
15Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou
didst laugh.
16And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went
with them to bring them on the way.
17And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;
18Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him?Genesis 18
57Genesis 18
19For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord , to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
20And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their
sin is very grievous;
21I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it,
which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
22And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood
yet before the Lord .
23And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
24Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare
the place for the fifty righteous that aretherein?
25That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and
that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right?
26And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all
the place for their sakes.
27And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which am butdust and ashes:
28Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for
lack offive? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.
29And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there.
And he said, I will not do itfor forty’s sake.
30And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there
shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it,if I find thirty there.
31And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure
there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy itfor twenty’s sake.
32And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure
ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy itfor ten’s sake.
33And the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham
returned unto his place.
58Genesis 18
Chapter 19
And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot
seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;
2And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant’s house, and tarry
all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said,
Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
3And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his
house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
4But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the
house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:
5And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where arethe men which came in to thee
this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
6And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,
7And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.
8Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring
them out unto you, and do ye to them as isgood in your eyes: only unto these men do
nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
9And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and
he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed
sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
10But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the
door.
11And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and
great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
12And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and
thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:
13For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of
the Lord ; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it.
14And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said,
Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that
mocked unto his sons in law.
15And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy
wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the
city.
16And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife,
and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto him: and they brought
him forth, and set him without the city.Genesis 19
59Genesis 19
17And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape
for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain,
lest thou be consumed.
18And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:
19Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy,
which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain,
lest some evil take me, and I die:
20Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither,
(isit not a little one?) and my soul shall live.
21And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not
overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.
22Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore
the name of the city was called Zoar.
23The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
24Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord
out of heaven;
25And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and
that which grew upon the ground.
26But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
27And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the
Lord :
28And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and
beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
29And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered
Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in
the which Lot dwelt.
30And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with
him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
31And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father isold, and there isnot a man in the
earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:
32Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve
seed of our father.
33And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with
her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
34And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I
lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in,
and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
60Genesis 19
35And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay
with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
36Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
37And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same isthe father of the
Moabites unto this day.
38And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same isthe
father of the children of Ammon unto this day.
61Genesis 19
Chapter 20
And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between
Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
2And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She ismy sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent,
and took Sarah.
3But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art buta
dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she isa man’s wife.
4But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous
nation?
5Said he not unto me, She ismy sister? and she, even she herself said, He ismy brother: in
the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.
6And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy
heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch
her.
7Now therefore restore the man hiswife; for he isa prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and
thou shalt live: and if thou restore hernot, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and
all that arethine.
8Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all
these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.
9Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and
what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
10And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?
11And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God isnot in this place; and they
will slay me for my wife’s sake.
12And yet indeed she ismy sister; she isthe daughter of my father, but not the daughter of
my mother; and she became my wife.
13And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father’s house, that I said
unto her, This isthy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we
shall come, say of me, He ismy brother.
14And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave
them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
15And Abimelech said, Behold, my land isbefore thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.
16And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold,
he isto thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that arewith thee, and with all other: thus she
was reproved.Genesis 20
62Genesis 20
17So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his
maidservants; and they bare children.
18For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah
Abraham’s wife.
63Genesis 20
Chapter 21
And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
2For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God
had spoken to him.
3And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to
him, Isaac.
4And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded
him.
5And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.
6And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.
7And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children
suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.
8And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that
Isaac was weaned.
9And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham,
mocking.
10Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of
this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
11And the thing was very grievous in Abraham’s sight because of his son.
12And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad,
and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her
voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
13And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he isthy seed.
14And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and
gave itunto Hagar, putting iton her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she
departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
15And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
16And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bowshot:
for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up
her voice, and wept.
17And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven,
and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the
lad where he is.
18Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.
19And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle
with water, and gave the lad drink.Genesis 21
64Genesis 21
20And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an
archer.
21And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land
of Egypt.
22And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his
host spake unto Abraham, saying, God iswith thee in all that thou doest:
23Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor
with my son, nor with my son’s son: butaccording to the kindness that I have done unto
thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
24And Abraham said, I will swear.
25And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech’s servants
had violently taken away.
26And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither
yet heard I of it,but to day.
27And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them
made a covenant.
28And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
29And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast
set by themselves?
30And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a
witness unto me, that I have digged this well.
31Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware both of them.
32Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief
captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.
33And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord ,
the everlasting God.
34And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines’ land many days.
65Genesis 21
Chapter 22
And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him,
Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.
2And he said, Take now thy son, thine only sonIsaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into
the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains
which I will tell thee of.
3And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his
young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose
up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
4Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
5And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will
go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
6And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid itupon Isaac his son; and he
took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.
7And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here amI, my
son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where isthe lamb for a burnt offering?
8And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.
9And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there,
and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the
wood.
10And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
11And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham:
and he said, Here amI.
12And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for
now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son
from me.
13And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a
thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt
offering in the stead of his son.
14And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said tothis day, In the
mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
15And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,
16And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord , for because thou hast done this thing,
and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:Genesis 22
66Genesis 22
17That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars
of the heaven, and as the sand which isupon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies;
18And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my
voice.
19So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer-
sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
20And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah,
she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;
21Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
22And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
23And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham’s brother.
24And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and
Thahash, and Maachah.
67Genesis 22
Chapter 23
And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the
life of Sarah.
2And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same isHebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham
came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
3And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,
4I ama stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you,
that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
5And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,
6Hear us, my lord: thou arta mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury
thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy
dead.
7And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children
of Heth.
8And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out
of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
9That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which isin the end of his field;
for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace
amongst you.
10And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham
in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,
11Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that istherein, I give it thee; in
the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.
12And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
13And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou
wilt give it,I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take itof me, and I will
bury my dead there.
14And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,
15My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what isthat
betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.
16And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which
he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current
money with the merchant.
17And the field of Ephron, which wasin Machpelah, which wasbefore Mamre, the field,
and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the
borders round about, were made sureGenesis 23
68Genesis 23
18Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that
went in at the gate of his city.
19And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before
Mamre: the same isHebron in the land of Canaan.
20And the field, and the cave that istherein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession
of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.
69Genesis 23
Chapter 24
And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the Lord had blessed Abraham in
all things.
2And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put,
I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:
3And I will make thee swear by the Lord , the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that
thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I
dwell:
4But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
5And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me
unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
6And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.
7The Lord God of heaven, which took me from my father’s house, and from the land
of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed
will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my
son from thence.
8And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my
oath: only bring not my son thither again.
9And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him
concerning that matter.
10And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the
goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city
of Nahor.
11And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of
the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.
12And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this
day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.
13Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come
out to draw water:
14And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray
thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the
same beshe that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that
thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.
15And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out,
who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with her
pitcher upon her shoulder.Genesis 24
70Genesis 24
16And the damsel wasvery fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and
she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
17And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy
pitcher.
18And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand,
and gave him drink.
19And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also,
until they have done drinking.
20And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to
draw water, and drew for all his camels.
21And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the Lord had made his
journey prosperous or not.
22And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring
of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;
23And said, Whose daughter artthou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room inthy father’s house
for us to lodge in?
24And she said unto him, I amthe daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare
unto Nahor.
25She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to
lodge in.
26And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the Lord .
27And he said, Blessed bethe Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute
my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the Lord led me to the house of
my master’s brethren.
28And the damsel ran, and told them ofher mother’s house these things.
29And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the
man, unto the well.
30And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and
when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that
he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.
31And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord ; wherefore standest thou without? for I
have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
32And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and
provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men’s feet that were with him.
33And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine
errand. And he said, Speak on.
34And he said, I amAbraham’s servant.
71Genesis 24
35And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given
him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels,
and asses.
36And Sarah my master’s wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him
hath he given all that he hath.
37And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the
daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:
38But thou shalt go unto my father’s house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my
son.
39And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.
40And he said unto me, The Lord , before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and
prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father’s
house:
41Then shalt thou be clear from thismy oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they
give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
42And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now
thou do prosper my way which I go:
43Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh
forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to
drink;
44And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: letthe same be
the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for my master’s son.
45And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her
pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto
her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
46And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I
will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
47And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter artthou? And she said, The daughter of
Bethuel, Nahor’s son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and
the bracelets upon her hands.
48And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord , and blessed the Lord God of my
master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter
unto his son.
49And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that
I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
50Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord : we
cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
72Genesis 24
51Behold, Rebekah isbefore thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master’s son’s wife, as
the Lord hath spoken.
52And it came to pass, that, when Abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the
Lord , bowing himself to the earth.
53And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave
them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
54And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and
they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
55And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a fewdays, at the least
ten; after that she shall go.
56And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way; send me
away that I may go to my master.
57And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.
58And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I
will go.
59And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s servant, and his
men.
60And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou artour sister, be thou the mother of
thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
61And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed
the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
62And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country.
63And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and
saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.
64And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.
65For she had said unto the servant, What man isthis that walketh in the field to meet us?
And the servant had said, It ismy master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.
66And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
67And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent, and took Rebekah, and she became
his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death.
73Genesis 24
Chapter 25
Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
2And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
3And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim,
and Leummim.
4And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these
were the children of Keturah.
5And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
6But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent
them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
7And these arethe days of the years of Abraham’s life which he lived, an hundred threescore
and fifteen years.
8Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years;
and was gathered to his people.
9And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron
the son of Zohar the Hittite, which isbefore Mamre;
10The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and
Sarah his wife.
11And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and
Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.
12Now these arethe generations of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian,
Sarah’s handmaid, bare unto Abraham:
13And these arethe names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their gener-
ations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
14And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
15Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
16These arethe sons of Ishmael, and these aretheir names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelve princes according to their nations.
17And these arethe years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and
he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.
18And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that isbefore Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria:
and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
19And these arethe generations of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham begat Isaac:
20And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the
Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.
21And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren: and the Lord was in-
treated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.Genesis 25
74Genesis 25
22And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it beso, why amI thus?
And she went to enquire of the Lord .
23And the Lord said unto her, Two nations arein thy womb, and two manner of people
shall be separated from thy bowels; and the onepeople shall be stronger than the other people;
and the elder shall serve the younger.
24And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her
womb.
25And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.
26And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau’s heel; and his name
was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.
27And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a
plain man, dwelling in tents.
28And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of hisvenison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.
29And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:
30And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I amfaint:
therefore was his name called Edom.
31And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
32And Esau said, Behold, I amat the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to
me?
33And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright
unto Jacob.
34Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose
up, and went his way: thus Esau despised hisbirthright.
75Genesis 25
Chapter 26
And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abra-
ham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
2And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land
which I shall tell thee of:
3Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto
thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Ab-
raham thy father;
4And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all
these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
5Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my
statutes, and my laws.
6And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:
7And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She ismy sister: for he feared
to say, She ismy wife; lest, said he,the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because
she was fair to look upon.
8And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Phil-
istines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his
wife.
9And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she isthy wife: and how saidst
thou, She ismy sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.
10And Abimelech said, What isthis thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly
have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
11And Abimelech charged all hispeople, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall
surely be put to death.
12Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the
Lord blessed him.
13And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:
14For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and
the Philistines envied him.
15For all the wells which his father’s servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father,
the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
16And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.
17And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
18And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham
his father; for the philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called them.Genesis 26
76Genesis 26
19And Isaac’s servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.
20And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac’s herdmen, saying, The water isours: and
he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.
21And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.
22And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and
he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the Lord hath made room for us,
and we shall be fruitful in the land.
23And he went up from thence to Beersheba.
24And the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, I amthe God of Abraham thy
father: fear not, for I amwith thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham’s sake.
25And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent
there: and there Isaac’s servants digged a well.
26Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and
Phichol the chief captain of his army.
27And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent
me away from you?
28And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee: and we said, Let there be
now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;
29That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee
nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou artnow the blessed of the Lord .
30And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
31And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them
away, and they departed from him in peace.
32And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning
the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
33And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city isBeersheba unto this day.
34And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the
Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:
35Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
77Genesis 26
Chapter 27
And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could
not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him,
Behold, here amI.
2And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:
3Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the
field, and take me some venison;
4And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring itto me, that I may eat; that my soul
may bless thee before I die.
5And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt
forvenison, and to bring it.
6And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto
Esau thy brother, saying,
7Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the
Lord before my death.
8Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
9Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make
them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth:
10And thou shalt bring itto thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before
his death.
11And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother isa hairy man, and I am
a smooth man:
12My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall
bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
13And his mother said unto him, Upon me bethy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and
go fetch me them.
14And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury
meat, such as his father loved.
15And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the
house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:
16And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of
his neck:
17And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of
her son Jacob.
18And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here amI; who art
thou, my son?Genesis 27
78Genesis 27
19And Jacob said unto his father, I amEsau thy firstborn; I have done according as thou
badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
20And Isaac said unto his son, How is itthat thou hast found itso quickly, my son? And he
said, Because the Lord thy God brought itto me.
21And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether
thou bemy very son Esau or not.
22And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice isJacob’s
voice, but the hands arethe hands of Esau.
23And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau’s hands: so
he blessed him.
24And he said, Artthou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
25And he said, Bring itnear to me, and I will eat of my son’s venison, that my soul may bless
thee. And he brought itnear to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he drank.
26And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.
27And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed
him, and said, See, the smell of my son isas the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed:
28Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of
corn and wine:
29Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let
thy mother’s sons bow down to thee: cursed beevery one that curseth thee, and blessed be
he that blesseth thee.
30And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob
was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in
from his hunting.
31And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his
father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son’s venison, that thy soul may bless me.
32And Isaac his father said unto him, Who artthou? And he said, I amthy son, thy firstborn
Esau.
33And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where ishe that hath taken venison,
and brought itme, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea,
and he shall be blessed.
34And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter
cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
35And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.
36And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times:
he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said,
Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
79Genesis 27
37And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his
brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him:
and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
38And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me
also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.
39And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness
of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;
40And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass
when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.
41And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and
Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my
brother Jacob.
42And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob
her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth
comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.
43Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran;
44And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother’s fury turn away;
45Until thy brother’s anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done
to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you
both in one day?
46And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if
Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which areof the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?
80Genesis 27
Chapter 28
And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou
shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
2Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother’s father; and take thee a wife
from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother’s brother.
3And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest
be a multitude of people;
4And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest
inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
5And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the
Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s mother.
6When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram, to take
him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;
7And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padanaram;
8And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;
9Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael Abraham’s son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.
10And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
11And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set;
and he took of the stones of that place, and putthem for his pillows, and lay down in that
place to sleep.
12And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
13And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I amthe Lord God of Abraham thy father,
and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;
14And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west,
and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed.
15And, behold, I amwith thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will
bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of.
16And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place; and I
knew itnot.
17And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful isthis place! this is none other but the house
of God, and this isthe gate of heaven.Genesis 28
81Genesis 28
18And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put forhis pillows,
and set it up fora pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
19And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that city was called Luz at
the first.
20And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that
I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
21So that I come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God:
22And this stone, which I have set fora pillar, shall be God’s house: and of all that thou shalt
give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.
82Genesis 28
Chapter 29
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.
2And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying
by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well’s
mouth.
3And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth,
and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place.
4And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence beye? And they said, Of Haran arewe.
5And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
6And he said unto them, Ishe well? And they said, He iswell: and, behold, Rachel his
daughter cometh with the sheep.
7And he said, Lo, it isyet high day, neither is ittime that the cattle should be gathered to-
gether: water ye the sheep, and go and feed them.
8And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and tillthey roll the
stone from the well’s mouth; then we water the sheep.
9And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep: for she kept
them.
10And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother,
and the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from
the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s brother.
11And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
12And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father’s brother, and that he was Rebekah’s son:
and she ran and told her father.
13And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to
meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told
Laban all these things.
14And Laban said to him, Surely thou artmy bone and my flesh. And he abode with him
the space of a month.
15And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou artmy brother, shouldest thou therefore
serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?
16And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the
younger was Rachel.
17Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.
18And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger
daughter.
19And Laban said, It isbetter that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another
man: abide with me.Genesis 29
83Genesis 29
20And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him buta few days, for
the love he had to her.
21And Jacob said unto Laban, Give memy wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go
in unto her.
22And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
23And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to
him; and he went in unto her.
24And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid foran handmaid.
25And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it wasLeah: and he said to Laban, What
isthis thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast
thou beguiled me?
26And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the
firstborn.
27Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with
me yet seven other years.
28And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife
also.
29And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.
30And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served
with him yet seven other years.
31And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was
barren.
32And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely
the Lord hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
33And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the Lord hath heard that I
was hated, he hath therefore given me this sonalso: and she called his name Simeon.
34And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be
joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called Levi.
35And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I praise the Lord : therefore
she called his name Judah; and left bearing.
84Genesis 29
Chapter 30
And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and
said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
2And Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, AmI in God’s stead, who hath
withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
3And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees
that I may also have children by her.
4And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.
5And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.
6And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me
a son: therefore called she his name Dan.
7And Bilhah Rachel’s maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son.
8And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed:
and she called his name Naphtali.
9When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to
wife.
10And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a son.
11And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.
12And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a second son.
13And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name
Asher.
14And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field,
and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee,
of thy son’s mandrakes.
15And she said unto her, Is ita small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest
thou take away my son’s mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee
to night for thy son’s mandrakes.
16And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said,
Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son’s mandrakes. And
he lay with her that night.
17And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.
18And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my hus-
band: and she called his name Issachar.
19And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.
20And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with
me, because I have born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.
21And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.Genesis 30
85Genesis 30
22And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.
23And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach:
24And she called his name Joseph; and said, The Lord shall add to me another son.
25And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send
me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
26Give memy wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou
knowest my service which I have done thee.
27And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: forI have
learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
28And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
29And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with
me.
30For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude;
and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine
own house also?
31And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if
thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock:
32I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted
cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the
goats: and of such shall be my hire.
33So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire
before thy face: every one that isnot speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown
among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.
34And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
35And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she
goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the
brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
36And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban’s
flocks.
37And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut tree; and pilled
white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
38And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering
troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
39And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled,
and spotted.
40And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked,
and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put
them not unto Laban’s cattle.
86Genesis 30
41And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods
before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.
42But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban’s, and the
stronger Jacob’s.
43And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and
menservants, and camels, and asses.
87Genesis 30
Chapter 31
And he heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that wasour
father’s; and of that which was our father’s hath he gotten all this glory.
2And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it wasnot toward him as before.
3And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and
I will be with thee.
4And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
5And said unto them, I see your father’s countenance, that it isnot toward me as before;
but the God of my father hath been with me.
6And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
7And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him
not to hurt me.
8If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he
said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.
9Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
10And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and
saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked,
speckled, and grisled.
11And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here amI.
12And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are
ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
13I amthe God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow
unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
14And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance
for us in our father’s house?
15Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also
our money.
16For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that isours, and our children’s:
now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.
17Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
18And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his
getting, which he had gotten in Padanaram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
19And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father’s.
20And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.
21So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face
toward the mount Gilead.
22And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.Genesis 31
88Genesis 31
23And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey; and they
overtook him in the mount Gilead.
24And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed
that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
25Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban
with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
26And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to
me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?
27Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me,
that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
28And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly
in so doing.
29It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me
yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
30And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy
father’s house, yetwherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
31And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou
wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.
32With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern
thou what isthine with me, and take itto thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen
them.
33And Laban went into Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into the two maidservants’
tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah’s tent, and entered into Rachel’s
tent.
34Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel’s furniture, and sat upon
them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.
35And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee;
for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched, but found not the images.
36And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban,
What ismy trespass? what ismy sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
37Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff?
set ithere before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.
38This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their
young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
39That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand
didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.
40Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep
departed from mine eyes.
89Genesis 31
41Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two
daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
42Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with
me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour
of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.
43And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters aremy daughters, and
these children aremy children, and these cattle aremy cattle, and all that thou seest ismine:
and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have
born?
44Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness
between me and thee.
45And Jacob took a stone, and set it up fora pillar.
46And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap:
and they did eat there upon the heap.
47And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.
48And Laban said, This heap isa witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the
name of it called Galeed;
49And Mizpah; for he said, The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one
from another.
50If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters,
no man iswith us; see, God iswitness betwixt me and thee.
51And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold thispillar, which I have cast betwixt
me and thee;
52This heap bewitness, and thispillar bewitness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee,
and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.
53The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us.
And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.
54Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and
they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.
55And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed
them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.
90Genesis 31
Chapter 32
And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
2And when Jacob saw them, he said, This isGod’s host: and he called the name of that place
Mahanaim.
3And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the
country of Edom.
4And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant
Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now:
5And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent
to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.
6And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also
he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
7Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that waswith him,
and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;
8And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which
is left shall escape.
9And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord
which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with
thee:
10I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed
unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two
bands.
11Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear
him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children.
12And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which
cannot be numbered for multitude.
13And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present
for Esau his brother;
14Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,
15Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten
foals.
16And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said
unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
17And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh
thee, saying, Whose artthou? and whither goest thou? and whose arethese before thee?
18Then thou shalt say, They bethy servant Jacob’s; it isa present sent unto my lord Esau:
and, behold, also he isbehind us.Genesis 32
91Genesis 32
19And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying,
On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.
20And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob isbehind us. For he said, I will appease
him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure
he will accept of me.
21So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.
22And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his
eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
23And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.
24And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the
day.
25And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh;
and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
26And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me.
27And he said unto him, What isthy name? And he said, Jacob.
28And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou
power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.
29And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me,I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore
isit that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
30And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my
life is preserved.
31And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
32Therefore the children of Israel eat not ofthe sinew which shrank, which isupon the hollow
of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that
shrank.
92Genesis 32
Chapter 33
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four
hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two
handmaids.
2And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after,
and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
3And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he
came near to his brother.
4And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and
they wept.
5And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who arethose
with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.
6Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
7And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph
near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
8And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These areto
find grace in the sight of my lord.
9And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.
10And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my
present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God,
and thou wast pleased with me.
11Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously
with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.
12And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.
13And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children aretender, and the flocks and
herds with young arewith me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will
die.
14Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according
as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my
lord unto Seir.
15And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that arewith me. And he said,
What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.
16So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
17And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle:
therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
18And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which isin the land of Canaan, when
he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city.Genesis 33
93Genesis 33
19And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children
of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for an hundred pieces of money.
20And he erected there an altar, and called it Elelohe-Israel.
94Genesis 33
Chapter 34
And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the
daughters of the land.
2And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took
her, and lay with her, and defiled her.
3And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake
kindly unto the damsel.
4And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
5And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle
in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come.
6And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.
7And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it:and the men were grieved,
and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s
daughter; which thing ought not to be done.
8And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your
daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.
9And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters
unto you.
10And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein,
and get you possessions therein.
11And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes,
and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
12Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me:
but give me the damsel to wife.
13And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, be-
cause he had defiled Dinah their sister:
14And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncir-
cumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
15But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be,that every male of you be cir-
cumcised;
16Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we
will dwell with you, and we will become one people.
17But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and
we will be gone.
18And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor’s son.
19And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob’s
daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father.Genesis 34
95Genesis 34
20And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed
with the men of their city, saying,
21These men arepeaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein;
for the land, behold, it islarge enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives,
and let us give them our daughters.
22Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every
male among us be circumcised, as they arecircumcised.
23Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs beours? only let us
consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
24And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his
city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.
25And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of
Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the
city boldly, and slew all the males.
26And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah
out of Shechem’s house, and went out.
27The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their
sister.
28They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which wasin the city, and
that which was in the field,
29And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled
even all that was in the house.
30And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the
inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in number,
they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I
and my house.
31And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
96Genesis 34
Chapter 35
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there: and make there an
altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy
brother.
2Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange
gods that areamong you, and be clean, and change your garments:
3And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered
me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.
4And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings
which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
5And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them,
and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
6So Jacob came to Luz, which isin the land of Canaan, that is,Bethel, he and all the
people that were with him.
7And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto
him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
8But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and
the name of it was called Allonbachuth.
9And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed
him.
10And God said unto him, Thy name isJacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob,
but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.
11And God said unto him, I amGod Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a
company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;
12And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after
thee will I give the land.
13And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
14And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and
he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.
15And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel.
16And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath:
and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.
17And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear
not; thou shalt have this son also.
18And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name
Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin.
19And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which isBethlehem.Genesis 35
97Genesis 35
20And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that isthe pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day.
21And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
22And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah
his father’s concubine: and Israel heard it.Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:
23The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar,
and Zebulun:
24The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:
25And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:
26And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these arethe sons of Jacob,
which were born to him in Padanaram.
27And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is
Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
28And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
29And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and
full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
98Genesis 35
Chapter 36
Now these arethe generations of Esau, who isEdom.
2Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
3And Bashemath Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
4And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;
5And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these arethe sons of Esau, which
were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
6And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house,
and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan;
and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.
7For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they
were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
8Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau isEdom.
9And these arethe generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:
10These arethe names of Esau’s sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the
son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
11And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
12And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau’s son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these
were the sons of Adah Esau’s wife.
13And these arethe sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were
the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife.
14And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon,
Esau’s wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
15These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn sonof Esau;
duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
16Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these arethe dukes that came of Eliphaz in
the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.
17And these arethe sons of Reuel Esau’s son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah,
duke Mizzah: these arethe dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these arethe sons
of Bashemath Esau’s wife.
18And these arethe sons of Aholibamah Esau’s wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke
Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau’s wife.
19These arethe sons of Esau, who isEdom, and these aretheir dukes.
20These arethe sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and
Zibeon, and Anah,Genesis 36
99Genesis 36
21And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these arethe dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir
in the land of Edom.
22And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sister was Timna.
23And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and
Onam.
24And these arethe children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found
the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
25And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.
26And these arethe children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
27The children of Ezer arethese; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
28The children of Dishan arethese; Uz, and Aran.
29These arethe dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke
Anah,
30Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these arethe dukes that came of Hori, among their
dukes in the land of Seir.
31And these arethe kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any
king over the children of Israel.
32And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
33And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
34And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
35And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab,
reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.
36And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
37And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth bythe river reigned in his stead.
38And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
39And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of
his city was Pau; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter
of Mezahab.
40And these arethe names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after
their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
41Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
42Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
43Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these bethe dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in
the land of their possession: he isEsau the father of the Edomites.
100Genesis 36
Chapter 37
And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
2These arethe generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock
with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his
father’s wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.
3Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age:
and he made him a coat of many colours.
4And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they
hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.
5And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told ithis brethren: and they hated him yet the
more.
6And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:
7For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood
upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
8And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have
dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.
9And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have
dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made
obeisance to me.
10And he told itto his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto
him, What isthis dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
11And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.
12And his brethren went to feed their father’s flock in Shechem.
13And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come, and I
will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here amI.
14And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well
with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he
came to Shechem.
15And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the
man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
16And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.
17And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan.
And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
18And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired
against him to slay him.
19And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.Genesis 37
101Genesis 37
20Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say,
Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
21And Reuben heard it,and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill
him.
22And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, butcast him into this pit that is in the wilder-
ness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to
his father again.
23And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph
out of his coat, hiscoat of many colours that was on him;
24And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in
it.
25And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a
company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and
myrrh, going to carry itdown to Egypt.
26And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is itif we slay our brother, and conceal his
blood?
27Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is
our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.
28Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out
of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought
Joseph into Egypt.
29And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph wasnot in the pit; and he rent
his clothes.
30And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child isnot; and I, whither shall I go?
31And they took Joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;
32And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought itto their father; and said, This
have we found: know now whether it bethy son’s coat or no.
33And he knew it, and said, It ismy son’s coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is
without doubt rent in pieces.
34And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son
many days.
35And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be com-
forted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his
father wept for him.
36And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s, andcaptain
of the guard.
102Genesis 37
Chapter 38
And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned
in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
2And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah; and he
took her, and went in unto her.
3And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.
4And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.
5And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at
Chezib, when she bare him.
6And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
7And Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord ; and the Lord slew him.
8And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and marry her, and raise up seed
to thy brother.
9And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto
his brother’s wife, that he spilled iton the ground, lest that he should give seed to his
brother.
10And the thing which he did displeased the Lord : wherefore he slew him also.
11Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father’s house, till
Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And
Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house.
12And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah’s wife died; and Judah was com-
forted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the
Adullamite.
13And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his
sheep.
14And she put her widow’s garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped
herself, and sat in an open place, which isby the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah
was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
15When Judah saw her, he thought her to bean harlot; because she had covered her face.
16And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee;
(for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me,
that thou mayest come in unto me?
17And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give mea pledge,
till thou send it?
18And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets,
and thy staff that isin thine hand. And he gave ither, and came in unto her, and she con-
ceived by him.Genesis 38
103Genesis 38
19And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of
her widowhood.
20And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive hispledge
from the woman’s hand: but he found her not.
21Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where isthe harlot, that was openly by the
way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this place.
22And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said,
that there was no harlot in this place.
23And Judah said, Let her take itto her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou
hast not found her.
24And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar
thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she iswith child by whoredom.
And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
25When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose
these are, amI with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose arethese, the signet,
and bracelets, and staff.
26And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous than I; because
that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.
27And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
28And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the oneput out hishand: and the midwife
took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
29And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she
said, How hast thou broken forth? thisbreach beupon thee: therefore his name was called
Pharez.
30And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his
name was called Zarah.
104Genesis 38
Chapter 39
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain
of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought
him down thither.
2And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of
his master the Egyptian.
3And his master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to
prosper in his hand.
4And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over
his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.
5And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over
all that he had, that the Lord blessed the Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake; and the blessing
of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.
6And he left all that he had in Joseph’s hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread
which he did eat. And Joseph was agoodly person, and well favoured.
7And it came to pass after these things, that his master’s wife cast her eyes upon Joseph;
and she said, Lie with me.
8But he refused, and said unto his master’s wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what iswith
me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;
9There isnone greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me
but thee, because thou arthis wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God?
10And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her,
to lie by her, orto be with her.
11And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business;
and there was none of the men of the house there within.
12And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her
hand, and fled, and got him out.
13And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled
forth,
14That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath
brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried
with a loud voice:
15And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his
garment with me, and fled, and got him out.
16And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.Genesis 39
105Genesis 39
17And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which
thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:
18And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me,
and fled out.
19And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto
him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.
20And Joseph’s master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king’s
prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.
21But the Lord was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the
sight of the keeper of the prison.
22And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph’s hand all the prisoners that were in
the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.
23The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the
Lord was with him, and that which he did, the Lord made itto prosper.
106Genesis 39
Chapter 40
And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and hisbaker
had offended their lord the king of Egypt.
2And Pharaoh was wroth against two ofhis officers, against the chief of the butlers, and
against the chief of the bakers.
3And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place
where Joseph was bound.
4And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they
continued a season in ward.
5And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man
according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt,
which were bound in the prison.
6And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they
were sad.
7And he asked Pharaoh’s officers that were with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying,
Wherefore look ye sosadly to day?
8And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there isno interpreter of it. And
Joseph said unto them, Donot interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.
9And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine
was before me;
10And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms
shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:
11And Pharaoh’s cup wasin my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh’s
cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.
12And Joseph said unto him, This isthe interpretation of it: The three branches arethree
days:
13Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place:
and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast
his butler.
14But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me,
and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:
15For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done
nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
16When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also
was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:
17And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the
birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.Genesis 40
107Genesis 40
18And Joseph answered and said, This isthe interpretation thereof: The three baskets are
three days:
19Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on
a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
20And it came to pass the third day, which wasPharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast
unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker
among his servants.
21And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into
Pharaoh’s hand:
22But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.
23Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.
108Genesis 40
Chapter 41
And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he
stood by the river.
2And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and
they fed in a meadow.
3And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and lean-
fleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.
4And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine.
So Pharaoh awoke.
5And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon
one stalk, rank and good.
6And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.
7And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and,
behold, it was a dream.
8And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for
all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream;
but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.
9Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:
10Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s
house, both meand the chief baker:
11And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the
interpretation of his dream.
12And there wasthere with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard;
and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream
he did interpret.
13And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office,
and him he hanged.
14Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon:
and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
15And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there isnone that can interpret
it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
16And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It isnot in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer
of peace.
17And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:
18And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and
they fed in a meadow:Genesis 41
109Genesis 41
19And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and lean-
fleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:
20And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:
21And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
22And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:
23And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after
them:
24And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told thisunto the magicians; but
there was none that could declare itto me.
25And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh isone: God hath shewed
Pharaoh what he isabout to do.
26The seven good kine areseven years; and the seven good ears areseven years: the dream
isone.
27And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them areseven years; and the
seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
28This isthe thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God isabout to do he sheweth
unto Pharaoh.
29Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:
30And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten
in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;
31And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it
shall bevery grievous.
32And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it isbecause the thing isestab-
lished by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
33Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land
of Egypt.
34Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part
of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
35And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the
hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
36And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall
be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.
37And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
38And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a oneas this is,a man in whom the
Spirit of God is?
39And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there isnone
so discreet and wise as thou art:
110Genesis 41
40Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled:
only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
41And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
42And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed
him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
43And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him,
Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.
44And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I amPharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his
hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
45And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath
the daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over allthe land of Egypt.
46And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And
Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
47And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
48And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and
laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid
he up in the same.
49And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for
it was without number.
50And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the
daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On bare unto him.
51And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said he,hath made me
forget all my toil, and all my father’s house.
52And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in
the land of my affliction.
53And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.
54And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth
was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
55And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and
Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.
56And the famine was over all the face of the earth: And Joseph opened all the storehouses,
and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
57And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was
so sore in all lands.
111Genesis 41
Chapter 42
Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do
ye look one upon another?
2And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.
3And Joseph’s ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
4But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest perad-
venture mischief befall him.
5And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the
land of Canaan.
6And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the
land: and Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces
to the earth.
7And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and
spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From
the land of Canaan to buy food.
8And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
9And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye
arespies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
10And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.
11We areall one man’s sons; we aretrue men, thy servants are no spies.
12And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
13And they said, Thy servants aretwelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan;
and, behold, the youngest isthis day with our father, and one isnot.
14And Joseph said unto them, That is itthat I spake unto you, saying, Ye arespies:
15Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your
youngest brother come hither.
16Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your
words may be proved, whether there be anytruth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely
ye arespies.
17And he put them all together into ward three days.
18And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; forI fear God:
19If ye betrue men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye,
carry corn for the famine of your houses:
20But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall
not die. And they did so.Genesis 42
112Genesis 42
21And they said one to another, We areverily guilty concerning our brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this
distress come upon us.
22And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the
child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
23And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter.
24And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and
communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
25Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man’s
money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.
26And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.
27And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his
money; for, behold, it was in his sack’s mouth.
28And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it iseven in my sack: and
their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What isthis that God
hath done unto us?
29And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that
befell unto them; saying,
30The man, who isthe lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the
country.
31And we said unto him, We aretrue men; we are no spies:
32We betwelve brethren, sons of our father; one isnot, and the youngest isthis day with
our father in the land of Canaan.
33And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye aretrue
men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food forthe famine of your house-
holds, and be gone:
34And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye areno spies, but that
ye aretrue men: sowill I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.
35And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of
money wasin his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they
were afraid.
36And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph isnot,
and Simeon isnot, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.
37And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee:
deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
38And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left
alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
113Genesis 42
Chapter 43
And the famine was sore in the land.
2And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt,
their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.
3And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall
not see my face, except your brother bewith you.
4If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:
5But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not
see my face, except your brother bewith you.
6And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a
brother?
7And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Isyour
father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these
words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
8And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that
we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.
9I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee,
and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:
10For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.
11And their father Israel said unto them, If it must beso now, do this; take of the best fruits
in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey,
spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:
12And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth
of your sacks, carry itagain in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:
13Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:
14And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other
brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.
15And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Ben-
jamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
16And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these
men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon.
17And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph’s house.
18And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph’s house; and they said,
Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that
he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
19And they came near to the steward of Joseph’s house, and they communed with him at
the door of the house,Genesis 43
114Genesis 43
20And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:
21And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man’s money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have
brought it again in our hand.
22And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who
put our money in our sacks.
23And he said, Peace beto you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given
you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.
24And the man brought the men into Joseph’s house, and gave them water, and they washed
their feet; and he gave their asses provender.
25And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they
should eat bread there.
26And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which wasin their hand
into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.
27And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Isyour father well, the old man of whom ye
spake? Ishe yet alive?
28And they answered, Thy servant our father isin good health, he isyet alive. And they
bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
29And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s son, and said, Is
this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto
thee, my son.
30And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where
to weep; and he entered into hischamber, and wept there.
31And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
32And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians,
which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the
Hebrews; for that isan abomination unto the Egyptians.
33And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest ac-
cording to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.
34And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin’s mess was five
times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.
115Genesis 43
Chapter 44
And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men’s sacks with food, as
much as they can carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth.
2And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money.
And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
3As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
4And when they were gone out of the city, and not yetfar off, Joseph said unto his steward,
Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore
have ye rewarded evil for good?
5Isnot this itin which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done
evil in so doing.
6And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
7And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants
should do according to this thing:
8Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks’ mouths, we brought again unto thee out
of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord’s house silver or gold?
9With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my
lord’s bondmen.
10And he said, Now also letit beaccording unto your words: he with whom it is found shall
be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.
11Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man
his sack.
12And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found
in Benjamin’s sack.
13Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.
14And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph’s house; for he was yet there: and they
fell before him on the ground.
15And Joseph said unto them, What deed isthis that ye have done? wot ye not that such a
man as I can certainly divine?
16And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we
clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we aremy lord’s
servants, both we, and healso with whom the cup is found.
17And he said, God forbid that I should do so: butthe man in whose hand the cup is found,
he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
18Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee,
speak a word in my lord’s ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou
arteven as Pharaoh.Genesis 44
116Genesis 44
19My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
20And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little
one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
21And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes
upon him.
22And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for ifhe should leave his father,
his father would die.
23And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you,
ye shall see my face no more.
24And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words
of my lord.
25And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
26And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go
down: for we may not see the man’s face, except our youngest brother bewith us.
27And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:
28And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not
since:
29And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave.
30Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad benot with us; seeing
that his life is bound up in the lad’s life;
31It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad isnot with us,that he will die: and thy
servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
32For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto
thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.
33Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord;
and let the lad go up with his brethren.
34For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad benot with me? lest peradventure I see the
evil that shall come on my father.
117Genesis 44
Chapter 45
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried,
Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made
himself known unto his brethren.
2And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.
3And Joseph said unto his brethren, I amJoseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren
could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.
4And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And
he said, I amJoseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
5Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God
did send me before you to preserve life.
6For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there arefive years, in the
which there shall neither beearing nor harvest.
7And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives
by a great deliverance.
8So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to
Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
9Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath
made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:
10And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and
thy children, and thy children’s children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou
hast:
11And there will I nourish thee; for yet there arefive years of famine; lest thou, and thy
household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.
12And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it ismy mouth that
speaketh unto you.
13And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye
shall haste and bring down my father hither.
14And he fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his
neck.
15Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren
talked with him.
16And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying, Joseph’s brethren are
come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
17And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and
go, get you unto the land of Canaan;Genesis 45
118Genesis 45
18And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the
good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
19Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your
little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
20Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt isyours.
21And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the com-
mandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
22To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred
pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.
23And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt,
and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
24So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall
not out by the way.
25And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their
father,
26And told him, saying, Joseph isyet alive, and he isgovernor over all the land of Egypt.
And Jacob’s heart fainted, for he believed them not.
27And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he
saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:
28And Israel said, It isenough; Joseph my son isyet alive: I will go and see him before I die.
119Genesis 45
Chapter 46
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered
sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
2And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said,
Here amI.
3And he said, I amGod, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will
there make of thee a great nation:
4I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph
shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
5And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and
their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
6And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan,
and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him:
7His sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters, and all his
seed brought he with him into Egypt.
8And these arethe names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and
his sons: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn.
9And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
10And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and
Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.
11And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
12And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zarah: but Er and
Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
13And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.
14And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
15These bethe sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram, with his daughter
Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.
16And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and
Areli.
17And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their
sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
18These arethe sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare
unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.
19The sons of Rachel Jacob’s wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.
20And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, which
Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.Genesis 46
120Genesis 46
21And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman,
Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
22These arethe sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.
23And the sons of Dan; Hushim.
24And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
25These arethe sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare
these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.
26All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob’s
sons’ wives, all the souls were threescore and six;
27And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the
house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.
28And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they
came into the land of Goshen.
29And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and
presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
30And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art
yet alive.
31And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father’s house, I will go up, and shew
Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father’s house, which were in the land of
Canaan, are come unto me;
32And the men areshepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought
their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
33And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What isyour occu-
pation?
34That ye shall say, Thy servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until
now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every
shepherd isan abomination unto the Egyptians.
121Genesis 46
Chapter 47
Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their
flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, be-
hold, they arein the land of Goshen.
2And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.
3And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What isyour occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh,
Thy servants areshepherds, both we, and also our fathers.
4They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants
have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine issore in the land of Canaan: now therefore,
we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
5And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:
6The land of Egypt isbefore thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to
dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest anymen of activity among
them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
7And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed
Pharaoh.
8And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old artthou?
9And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage arean hundred and
thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
10And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
11And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land
of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
12And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household, with
bread, according to their families.
13And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land
of Egypt and allthe land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
14And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the
land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into
Pharaoh’s house.
15And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians
came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the
money faileth.
16And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
17And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for
horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them
with bread for all their cattle for that year.Genesis 47
122Genesis 47
18When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We
will not hide itfrom my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of
cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
19Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for
bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give usseed, that we may
live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.
20And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man
his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh’s.
21And as for the people, he removed them to cities from oneend of the borders of Egypt
even to the other end thereof.
22Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of
Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their
lands.
23Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for
Pharaoh: lo, here isseed for you, and ye shall sow the land.
24And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh,
and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of
your households, and for food for your little ones.
25And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we
will be Pharaoh’s servants.
26And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have
the fifth part; except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh’s.
27And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had posses-
sions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.
28And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an
hundred forty and seven years.
29And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto
him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and
deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:
30But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their
buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.
31And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the
bed’s head.
123Genesis 47
Chapter 48
And it came to pass after these things, that onetold Joseph, Behold, thy father issick:
and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
2And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel
strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.
3And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan,
and blessed me,
4And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of
thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee foran everlasting
possession.
5And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land
of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, aremine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be
mine.
6And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the
name of their brethren in their inheritance.
7And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the
way, when yet there wasbut a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the
way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.
8And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, and said, Who arethese?
9And Joseph said unto his father, They aremy sons, whom God hath given me in this place.
And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
10Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them
near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.
11And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed
me also thy seed.
12And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his
face to the earth.
13And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and
Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand, and brought them near unto him.
14And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim’s head, who was the
younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh
was the firstborn.
15And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac
did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,
16The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named
on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude
in the midst of the earth.Genesis 48
124Genesis 48
17And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it
displeased him: and he held up his father’s hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s head unto
Manasseh’s head.
18And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this isthe firstborn; put thy right
hand upon his head.
19And his father refused, and said, I know it,my son, I know it:he also shall become a
people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and
his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
20And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as
Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
21And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again
unto the land of your fathers.
22Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the
hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
125Genesis 48
Chapter 49
And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you
that which shall befall you in the last days.
2Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.
3Reuben, thou artmy firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excel-
lency of dignity, and the excellency of power:
4Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father’s bed; then
defiledst thou it:he went up to my couch.
5Simeon and Levi arebrethren; instruments of cruelty are intheir habitations.
6O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou
united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.
7Cursed betheir anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
8Judah, thou art hewhom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall bein the neck of
thine enemies; thy father’s children shall bow down before thee.
9Judah isa lion’s whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he
couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
10The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh
come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.
11Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine; he washed his gar-
ments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:
12His eyes shall bered with wine, and his teeth white with milk.
13Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall befor an haven of ships; and
his border shall beunto Zidon.
14Issachar isa strong ass couching down between two burdens:
15And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder
to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.
16Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
17Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that
his rider shall fall backward.
18I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord .
19Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.
20Out of Asher his bread shall befat, and he shall yield royal dainties.
21Naphtali isa hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.
22Joseph isa fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over
the wall:
23The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:Genesis 49
126Genesis 49
24But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence isthe shepherd, the stone of Israel:)
25Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless
thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the
breasts, and of the womb:
26The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the
utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown
of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
27Benjamin shall ravin asa wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night
he shall divide the spoil.
28All these arethe twelve tribes of Israel: and this is itthat their father spake unto them,
and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.
29And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me
with my fathers in the cave that isin the field of Ephron the Hittite,
30In the cave that isin the field of Machpelah, which isbefore Mamre, in the land of Canaan,
which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.
31There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his
wife; and there I buried Leah.
32The purchase of the field and of the cave that istherein was from the children of Heth.
33And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into
the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.
127Genesis 49
Chapter 50
And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
2And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians
embalmed Israel.
3And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are em-
balmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.
4And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh,
saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh,
saying,
5My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the
land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury
my father, and I will come again.
6And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
7And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh,
the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
8And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father’s house: only their little ones,
and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
9And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.
10And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which isbeyond Jordan, and there they
mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father
seven days.
11And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of
Atad, they said, This isa grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was
called Abelmizraim, which isbeyond Jordan.
12And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:
13For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field
of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of
Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
14And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him
to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
15And when Joseph’s brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will
peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
16And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died,
saying,
17So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and
their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants
of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.Genesis 50
128Genesis 50
18And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we bethy
servants.
19And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for amI in the place of God?
20But as for you, ye thought evil against me; butGod meant it unto good, to bring to pass,
as it isthis day, to save much people alive.
21Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted
them, and spake kindly unto them.
22And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father’s house: and Joseph lived an hundred
and ten years.
23And Joseph saw Ephraim’s children of the third generation: the children also of Machir
the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph’s knees.
24And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you out
of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
25And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and
ye shall carry up my bones from hence.
26So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was
put in a coffin in Egypt.
129Genesis 50
The Second Book of Moses, Called
ExodusExodus
130Exodus
Chapter 1
Now these arethe names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man
and his household came with Jacob.
2Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
3Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
4Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
5And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in
Egypt already.
6And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
7And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and
waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them.
8Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
9And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel aremore and
mightier than we:
10Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when
there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and soget
them up out of the land.
11Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they
built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
12But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were
grieved because of the children of Israel.
13And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:
14And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all
manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with
rigour.
15And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one
was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:
16And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them
upon the stools; if it bea son, then ye shall kill him: but if it bea daughter, then she shall
live.
17But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but
saved the men children alive.
18And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done
this thing, and have saved the men children alive?
19And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women arenot as the Egyptian
women; for they arelively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.Exodus 1
131Exodus 1
20Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very
mighty.
21And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
22And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the
river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.
132Exodus 1
Chapter 2
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
2And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was agoodly
child, she hid him three months.
3And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed
it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid itin the flags by the
river’s brink.
4And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.
5And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens
walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her
maid to fetch it.
6And when she had opened it,she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had
compassion on him, and said, This is oneof the Hebrews’ children.
7Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew
women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
8And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child’s mother.
9And Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will
give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
10And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her
son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.
11And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his
brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one
of his brethren.
12And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew
the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
13And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together:
and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
14And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as
thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.
15Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the
face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.
16Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled
the troughs to water their father’s flock.
17And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them,
and watered their flock.
18And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to
day?Exodus 2
133Exodus 2
19And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew
water enough for us, and watered the flock.
20And he said unto his daughters, And where ishe? why isit that ye have left the man? call
him, that he may eat bread.
21And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
22And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger
in a strange land.
23And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children
of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God
by reason of the bondage.
24And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with
Isaac, and with Jacob.
25And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them.
134Exodus 2
Chapter 3
Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led
the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.
2And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush:
and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
3And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
4And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst
of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here amI.
5And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place
whereon thou standest is holy ground.
6Moreover he said, I amthe God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.
7And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which arein Egypt,
and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;
8And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them
up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey;
unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and
the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
9Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also
seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.
10Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my
people the children of Israel out of Egypt.
11And Moses said unto God, Who amI, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should
bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
12And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall bea token unto thee, that I have
sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon
this mountain.
13And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say
unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What
is his name? what shall I say unto them?
14And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.
15And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The
Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath sent me unto you: this ismy name for ever, and this ismy memorial unto all generations.Exodus 3
135Exodus 3
16Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely
visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt:
17And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
18And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel,
unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath met
with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we
may sacrifice to the Lord our God.
19And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.
20And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in
the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.
21And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass,
that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:
22But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house,
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and
upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
136Exodus 3
Chapter 4
And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto
my voice: for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee.
2And the Lord said unto him, What isthat in thine hand? And he said, A rod.
3And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent;
and Moses fled from before it.
4And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put
forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand:
5That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.
6And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And
he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as
snow.
7And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom
again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.
8And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the
first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
9And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto
thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour itupon the dry land: and
the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.
10And Moses said unto the Lord , O my Lord, I amnot eloquent, neither heretofore,
nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I amslow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
11And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man’s mouth? or who maketh the dumb,
or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord ?
12Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.
13And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.
14And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and he said, Isnot Aaron the Levite
thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee:
and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.
15And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth,
and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
16And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee
instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.
17And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.
18And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me
go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which arein Egypt, and see whether they be
yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.Exodus 4
137Exodus 4
19And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead
which sought thy life.
20And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the
land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
21And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do
all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his
heart, that he shall not let the people go.
22And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord , Israel ismy son, even my firstborn:
23And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him
go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.
24And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill
him.
25Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast itat his
feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband artthou to me.
26So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art,because of the circumcision.
27And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and
met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.
28And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him, and all the signs which
he had commanded him.
29And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of
Israel:
30And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs
in the sight of the people.
31And the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of
Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and wor-
shipped.
138Exodus 4
Chapter 5
And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God
of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
2And Pharaoh said, Who isthe Lord , that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know
not the Lord , neither will I let Israel go.
3And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three
days’ journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God; lest he fall upon us with
pestilence, or with the sword.
4And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people
from their works? get you unto your burdens.
5And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now aremany, and ye make them rest
from their burdens.
6And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers,
saying,
7Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather
straw for themselves.
8And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall
not diminish ought thereof: for they beidle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go andsacrifice
to our God.
9Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not
regard vain words.
10And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the
people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
11Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.
12So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble
instead of straw.
13And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there
was straw.
14And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them,
were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both
yesterday and to day, as heretofore?
15Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying,
Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?
16There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold,
thy servants arebeaten; but the fault isin thine own people.
17But he said, Ye areidle, ye areidle: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord .Exodus 5
139Exodus 5
18Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the
tale of bricks.
19And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was
said, Ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task.
20And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from
Pharaoh:
21And they said unto them, The Lord look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our
savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword
in their hand to slay us.
22And Moses returned unto the Lord , and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou soevil entreated
this people? why isit that thou hast sent me?
23For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither
hast thou delivered thy people at all.
140Exodus 5
Chapter 6
Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with
a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his
land.
2And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I amthe Lord :
3And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name ofGod Almighty,
but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.
4And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the
land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.
5And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in
bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.
6Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I amthe Lord , and I will bring you out from
under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem
you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments:
7And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that
I amthe Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
8And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abra-
ham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I amthe Lord .
9And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses
for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.
10And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
11Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his
land.
12And Moses spake before the Lord , saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened
unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who amof uncircumcised lips?
13And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children
of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt.
14These bethe heads of their fathers’ houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel;
Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these bethe families of Reuben.
15And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul
the son of a Canaanitish woman: these arethe families of Simeon.
16And these arethe names of the sons of Levi according to their generations; Gershon,
and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven
years.
17The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.Exodus 6
141Exodus 6
18And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the
life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three years.
19And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these arethe families of Levi according to
their generations.
20And Amram took him Jochebed his father’s sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and
Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.
21And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
22And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.
23And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and
she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these arethe families of the
Korhites.
25And Eleazar Aaron’s son took him oneof the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare
him Phinehas: these arethe heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
26These arethat Aaron and Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel
from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
27These arethey which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel
from Egypt: these arethat Moses and Aaron.
28And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,
29That the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I amthe Lord : speak thou unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt all that I say unto thee.
30And Moses said before the Lord , Behold, I amof uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh
hearken unto me?
142Exodus 6
Chapter 7
And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.
2Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh,
that he send the children of Israel out of his land.
3And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of
Egypt.
4But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring
forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great
judgments.
5And the Egyptians shall know that I amthe Lord , when I stretch forth mine hand upon
Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.
6And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.
7And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they
spake unto Pharaoh.
8And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
9When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say
unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast itbefore Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.
10And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the Lord had com-
manded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became
a serpent.
11Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt,
they also did in like manner with their enchantments.
12For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod swallowed
up their rods.
13And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.
14And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh’s heart ishardened, he refuseth to let the
people go.
15Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt
stand by the river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt
thou take in thine hand.
16And thou shalt say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying,
Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou
wouldest not hear.
17Thus saith the Lord , In this thou shalt know that I amthe Lord : behold, I will smite with
the rod that isin mine hand upon the waters which arein the river, and they shall be turned
to blood.Exodus 7
143Exodus 7
18And the fish that isin the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall
lothe to drink of the water of the river.
19And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine
hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds,
and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels ofwood, and in vessels ofstone.
20And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote
the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants;
and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
21And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not
drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
22And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was
hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the Lord had said.
23And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.
24And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not
drink of the water of the river.
25And seven days were fulfilled, after that the Lord had smitten the river.
144Exodus 7
Chapter 8
And the Lord spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the
Lord , Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:
3And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine
house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
4And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.
5And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy
rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon
the land of Egypt.
6And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and
covered the land of Egypt.
7And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land
of Egypt.
8Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the Lord , that he may take
away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do
sacrifice unto the Lord .
9And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy
servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may
remain in the river only?
10And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be itaccording to thy word: that thou mayest know
that there isnone like unto the Lord our God.
11And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and
from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.
12And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the Lord because
of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.
13And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses,
out of the villages, and out of the fields.
14And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.
15But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not
unto them; as the Lord had said.
16And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the
dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
17And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the
earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout
all the land of Egypt.Exodus 8
145Exodus 8
18And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not:
so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
19Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This isthe finger of God: and Pharaoh’s heart was
hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.
20And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh;
lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord , Let my people go,
that they may serve me.
21Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians
shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.
22And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms
of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I amthe Lord in the midst of the
earth.
23And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.
24And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh,
and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by
reason of the swarm of flies.
25And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God
in the land.
26And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians to the Lord our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before
their eyes, and will they not stone us?
27We will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord our God, as
he shall command us.
28And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wil-
derness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me.
29And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the Lord that the swarms
of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but
let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord .
30And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord .
31And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies
from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
32And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.
146Exodus 8
Chapter 9
Then the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the Lord
God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still,
3Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which isin the field, upon the horses, upon
the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall bea very grievous
murrain.
4And the Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall
nothing die of all that isthe children’s of Israel.
5And the Lord appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the Lord shall do this thing in the
land.
6And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the
cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
7And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And
the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
8And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the
furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
9And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth
with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.
10And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up
toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.
11And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was
upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
12And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the
Lord had spoken unto Moses.
13And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh,
and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may
serve me.
14For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and
upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there isnone like me in all the earth.
15For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence;
and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.
16And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew inthee my power; and
that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.
17As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
18Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath
not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.Exodus 9
147Exodus 9
19Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every
man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail
shall come down upon them, and they shall die.
20He that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants
and his cattle flee into the houses:
21And he that regarded not the word of the Lord left his servants and his cattle in the field.
22And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there
may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the
field, throughout the land of Egypt.
23And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the Lord sent thunder and hail,
and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
24So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none
like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
25And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man
and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.
26Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
27And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned
this time: the Lord isrighteous, and I and my people arewicked.
28Intreat the Lord (for it isenough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and
I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.
29And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my
hands unto the Lord ; and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that
thou mayest know how that the earth isthe Lord ’S.
30But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.
31And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was
bolled.
32But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up.
33And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the Lord :
and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
34And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned
yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
35And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as
the Lord had spoken by Moses.
148Exodus 9
Chapter 10
And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and
the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my signs before him:
2And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s son, what things I have
wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how
that I amthe Lord .
3And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord God
of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go,
that they may serve me.
4Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the locusts into thy
coast:
5And they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they
shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and
shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:
6And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the
Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that
they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.
7And Pharaoh’s servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the
men go, that they may serve the Lord their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?
8And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve
the Lord your God: butwho arethey that shall go?
9And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our
daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto the
Lord .
10And he said unto them, Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little
ones: look to it;for evil isbefore you.
11Not so: go now ye that aremen, and serve the Lord ; for that ye did desire. And they were
driven out from Pharaoh’s presence.
12And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the
locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even
all that the hail hath left.
13And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an east
wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind
brought the locusts.
14And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt:
very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them
shall be such.Exodus 10
149Exodus 10
15For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did
eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there re-
mained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of
Egypt.
16Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against
the Lord your God, and against you.
17Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the Lord your God,
that he may take away from me this death only.
18And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord .
19And the Lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast
them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.
20But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.
21And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may
be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.
22And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all
the land of Egypt three days:
23They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children
of Israel had light in their dwellings.
24And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the Lord ; only let your flocks
and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.
25And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice
unto the Lord our God.
26Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we
take to serve the Lord our God; and we know not with what we must serve the Lord , until
we come thither.
27But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go.
28And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more;
for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.
29And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.
150Exodus 10
Chapter 11
And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and
upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely
thrust you out hence altogether.
2Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every
woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.
3And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses
was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of
the people.
4And Moses said, Thus saith the Lord , About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:
5And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth
upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that isbehind the mill; and all
the firstborn of beasts.
6And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like
it, nor shall be like it any more.
7But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or
beast: that ye may know how that the Lord doth put a difference between the Egyptians and
Israel.
8And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me,
saying, Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he
went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.
9And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may
be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
10And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the Lord hardened
Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.Exodus 11
151Exodus 11
Chapter 12
And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
2This month shall beunto you the beginning of months: it shall bethe first month of the
year to you.
3Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth dayof this month they
shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an
house:
4And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his
house take itaccording to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall
make your count for the lamb.
5Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take itout from the
sheep, or from the goats:
6And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly
of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.
7And they shall take of the blood, and strike iton the two side posts and on the upper door
post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.
8And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with
bitter herbs they shall eat it.
9Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs,
and with the purtenance thereof.
10And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it
until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
11And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff
in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it isthe Lord ’S passover.
12For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the
land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment:
I amthe Lord .
13And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see
the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when
I smite the land of Egypt.
14And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord
throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
15Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out
of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.Exodus 12
152Exodus 12
16And in the first day there shall bean holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall
be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which
every man must eat, that only may be done of you.
17And ye shall observe the feast ofunleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought
your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations
by an ordinance for ever.
18In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened
bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
19Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which
is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a
stranger, or born in the land.
20Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.
21Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take
you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.
22And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip itin the blood that isin the bason, and strike
the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that isin the bason; and none of you shall
go out at the door of his house until the morning.
23For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon
the lintel, and on the two side posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the
destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
24And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
25And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, ac-
cording as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.
26And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this
service?
27That ye shall say, It isthe sacrifice of the Lord ’S passover, who passed over the houses of
the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And
the people bowed the head and worshipped.
28And the children of Israel went away, and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and
Aaron, so did they.
29And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive
that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.
30And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there
was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
31And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth
from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord , as ye have
said.
153Exodus 12
32Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.
33And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the
land in haste; for they said, We beall dead men.
34And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being
bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
35And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the
Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment:
36And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto
them such things as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.
37And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred
thousand on foot that were men, beside children.
38And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much
cattle.
39And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt,
for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither
had they prepared for themselves any victual.
40Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred
and thirty years.
41And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day
it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.
42It isa night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them out from the land of
Egypt: this isthat night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in their gener-
ations.
43And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This isthe ordinance of the passover: There
shall no stranger eat thereof:
44But every man’s servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then
shall he eat thereof.
45A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
46In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of
the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
47All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
48And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the Lord , let
all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one
that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
49One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among
you.
50Thus did all the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
154Exodus 12
51And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the Lord did bring the children of Israel out of
the land of Egypt by their armies.
155Exodus 12
Chapter 13
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
Israel, both of man and of beast: it ismine.
3And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt,
out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this
place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
4This day came ye out in the month Abib.
5And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy
fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in
this month.
6Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall bea feast to the
Lord .
7Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with
thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.
8And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the
Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
9And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine
eyes, that the Lord ’S law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought
thee out of Egypt.
10Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.
11And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he
sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,
12That thou shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that
cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall bethe Lord ’S.
13And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem
it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou
redeem.
14And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What isthis? that
thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the
house of bondage:
15And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore
I sacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my
children I redeem.Exodus 13
156Exodus 13
16And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by
strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.
17And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not
through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest
peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:
18But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the
children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
19And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of
Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with
you.
20And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of
the wilderness.
21And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by
night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:
22He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before
the people.
157Exodus 13
Chapter 14
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth, between
Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
3For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They areentangled in the land, the wilderness
hath shut them in.
4And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honoured
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I amthe Lord . And
they did so.
5And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of
his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we
have let Israel go from serving us?
6And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:
7And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over
every one of them.
8And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children
of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand.
9But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his
horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before
Baalzephon.
10And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold,
the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried
out unto the Lord .
11And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away
to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of
Egypt?
12Isnot this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve
the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die
in the wilderness.
13And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the
Lord , which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall
see them again no more for ever.
14The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
15And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children
of Israel, that they go forward:
16But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the
children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.Exodus 14
158Exodus 14
17And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and
I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his
horsemen.
18And the Egyptians shall know that I amthe Lord , when I have gotten me honour upon
Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
19And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind
them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:
20And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud
and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the
other all the night.
21And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused the sea to go back by
a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
22And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the
waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
23And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all
Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
24And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto the host of the
Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians,
25And took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said,
Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians.
26And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters
may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
27And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength
when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
28And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of
Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them.
29But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
30Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the
Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.
31And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians: and the people
feared the Lord , and believed the Lord , and his servant Moses.
159Exodus 14
Chapter 15
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord , and spake, saying,
I will sing unto the Lord , for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he
thrown into the sea.
2The Lord ismy strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he ismy God, and I will
prepare him an habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.
3The Lord isa man of war: the Lord ishis name.
4Pharaoh’s chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are
drowned in the Red sea.
5The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.
6Thy right hand, O Lord , is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O Lord , hath dashed
in pieces the enemy.
7And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against
thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.
8And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright
as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
9The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied
upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
10Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty
waters.
11Who islike unto thee, O Lord , among the gods? who islike thee, glorious in holiness,
fearful inpraises, doing wonders?
12Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
13Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided
them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.
14The people shall hear, andbe afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.
15Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take
hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
16Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be asstill as
a stone; till thy people pass over, O Lord , till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.
17Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, inthe
place, O Lord , which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which
thy hands have established.
18The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.
19For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea,
and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went
on dry land in the midst of the sea.Exodus 15
160Exodus 15
20And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all
the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
21And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord , for he hath triumphed gloriously; the
horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
22So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur;
and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
23And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they
were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.
24And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
25And he cried unto the Lord ; and the Lord shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into
the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance,
and there he proved them,
26And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that
which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes,
I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I
amthe Lord that healeth thee.
27And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm
trees: and they encamped there by the waters.
161Exodus 15
Chapter 16
And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel
came unto the wilderness of Sin, which isbetween Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of
the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
2And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron
in the wilderness:
3And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the
Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the
full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
4Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the
people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they
will walk in my law, or no.
5And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in;
and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
6And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that
the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt:
7And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the Lord ; for that he heareth your mur-
murings against the Lord : and what arewe, that ye murmur against us?
8And Moses said, This shall be,when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and
in the morning bread to the full; for that the Lord heareth your murmurings which ye
murmur against him: and what arewe? your murmurings arenot against us, but against
the Lord .
9And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
Come near before the Lord : for he hath heard your murmurings.
10And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel,
that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in the
cloud.
11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
12I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I
amthe Lord your God.
13And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the
morning the dew lay round about the host.
14And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay
a small round thing, assmall as the hoar frost on the ground.
15And when the children of Israel saw it,they said one to another, It ismanna: for they wist
not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This isthe bread which the Lord hath given
you to eat.Exodus 16
162Exodus 16
16This isthe thing which the Lord hath commanded, Gather of it every man according
tohis eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every
man for them which arein his tents.
17And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.
18And when they did mete itwith an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and
he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
19And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
20Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the
morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.
21And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun
waxed hot, it melted.
22And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two
omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
23And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To morrow isthe rest of
the holy sabbath unto the Lord : bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will
seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
24And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there
any worm therein.
25And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day isa sabbath unto the Lord : to day ye shall not
find it in the field.
26Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which isthe sabbath, in it there shall be
none.
27And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to
gather, and they found none.
28And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my
laws?
29See, for that the Lord hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day
the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day.
30So the people rested on the seventh day.
31And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed,
white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
32And Moses said, This isthe thing which the Lord commandeth, Fill an omer of it to
be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the
wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
33And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay
it up before the Lord , to be kept for your generations.
34As the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
163Exodus 16
35And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited;
they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
36Now an omer isthe tenth part of an ephah.
164Exodus 16
Chapter 17
And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin,
after their journeys, according to the commandment of the Lord , and pitched in Rephidim:
and there was no water for the people to drink.
2Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink.
And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the Lord ?
3And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said,
Wherefore isthis that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and
our cattle with thirst?
4And Moses cried unto the Lord , saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost
ready to stone me.
5And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders
of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.
6Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the
rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in
the sight of the elders of Israel.
7And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord , saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?
8Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
9And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow
I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.
10So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and
Hur went up to the top of the hill.
11And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let
down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
12But Moses’ hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put itunder him, and he sat
thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on
the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
13And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
14And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this fora memorial in a book, and rehearse itin the
ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
15And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi:
16For he said, Because the Lord hath sworn that the Lord will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation.Exodus 17
165Exodus 17
Chapter 18
When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father in law, heard of all that God had done
for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt;
2Then Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her back,
3And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he said, I have been an
alien in a strange land:
4And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help,
and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:
5And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the
wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:
6And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and
her two sons with her.
7And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and
they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.
8And Moses told his father in law all that the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and to the
Egyptians for Israel’s sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how
the Lord delivered them.
9And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel, whom he had
delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.
10And Jethro said, Blessed bethe Lord , who hath delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the
hand of the Egyptians.
11Now I know that the Lord isgreater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt
proudly he was above them.
12And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron
came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’ father in law before God.
13And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people
stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.
14And when Moses’ father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What isthis thing
that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee
from morning unto even?
15And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of
God:
16When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and
I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.
17And Moses’ father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest isnot good.Exodus 18
166Exodus 18
18Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that iswith thee: for this thing is
too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
19Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou
for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God:
20And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein
they must walk, and the work that they must do.
21Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of
truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to berulers of thousands, and rulers
of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:
22And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they
shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself,
and they shall bear the burden with thee.
23If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so,then thou shalt be able to endure,
and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
24So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said.
25And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers
of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
26And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but
every small matter they judged themselves.
27And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.
167Exodus 18
Chapter 19
In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt,
the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.
2For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come tothe desert of Sinai, and had
pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.
3And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying,
Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;
4Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and
brought you unto myself.
5Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth ismine:
6And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These arethe words
which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.
7And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all
these words which the Lord commanded him.
8And all the people answered together, and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do.
And Moses returned the words of the people unto the Lord .
9And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may
hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the
people unto the Lord .
10And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to
morrow, and let them wash their clothes,
11And be ready against the third day: for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight
of all the people upon mount Sinai.
12And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves,
that yego notup into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount
shall be surely put to death:
13There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether
it bebeast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to
the mount.
14And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people;
and they washed their clothes.
15And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.
16And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and
lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud;
so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.Exodus 19
168Exodus 19
17And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood
at the nether part of the mount.
18And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire:
and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked
greatly.
19And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses
spake, and God answered him by a voice.
20And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the Lord called
Moses upto the top of the mount; and Moses went up.
21And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto
the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.
22And let the priests also, which come near to the Lord , sanctify themselves, lest the Lord
break forth upon them.
23And Moses said unto the Lord , The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou
chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
24And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and
Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the
Lord , lest he break forth upon them.
25So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.
169Exodus 19
Chapter 20
And God spake all these words, saying,
2I amthe Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage.
3Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
4Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that isin
heaven above, or that isin the earth beneath, or that isin the water under the earth:
5Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God ama
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me;
6And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
7Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
8Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
9Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:
10But the seventh day isthe sabbath of the Lord thy God: in itthou shalt not do any work,
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle,
nor thy stranger that iswithin thy gates:
11For insix days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is,and rested
the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
12Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which
the Lord thy God giveth thee.
13Thou shalt not kill.
14Thou shalt not commit adultery.
15Thou shalt not steal.
16Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
17Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife,
nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that isthy
neighbour’s.
18And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the
trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it,they removed, and stood
afar off.
19And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak
with us, lest we die.
20And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear
may be before your faces, that ye sin not.Exodus 20
170Exodus 20
21And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God
was.
22And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye
have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
23Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold.
24An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offer-
ings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record my
name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
25And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if
thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.
26Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered
thereon.
171Exodus 20
Chapter 21
Now these arethe judgments which thou shalt set before them.
2If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out
free for nothing.
3If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall
go out with him.
4If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and
her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself.
5And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not
go out free:
6Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or
unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve
him for ever.
7And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the
menservants do.
8If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be re-
deemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceit-
fully with her.
9And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of
daughters.
10If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not
diminish.
11And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.
12He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.
13And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee
a place whither he shall flee.
14But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt
take him from mine altar, that he may die.
15And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.
16And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall
surely be put to death.
17And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
18And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with hisfist, and
he die not, but keepeth hisbed:
19If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only
he shall pay forthe loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.Exodus 21
172Exodus 21
20And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand;
he shall be surely punished.
21Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he ishis money.
22If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet
no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman’s husband will lay
upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.
23And if anymischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
24Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
25Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
26And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall
let him go free for his eye’s sake.
27And if he smite out his manservant’s tooth, or his maidservant’s tooth; he shall let him
go free for his tooth’s sake.
28If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and
his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall bequit.
29But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to
his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox
shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.
30If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life what-
soever is laid upon him.
31Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall
it be done unto him.
32If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty
shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
33And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox
or an ass fall therein;
34The owner of the pit shall make itgood, and give money unto the owner of them; and the
dead beast shall be his.
35And if one man’s ox hurt another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and
divide the money of it; and the dead oxalso they shall divide.
36Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept
him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.
173Exodus 21
Chapter 22
If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for
an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.
2If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed
for him.
3If the sun be risen upon him, there shall beblood shed for him; forhe should make full
restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
4If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall
restore double.
5If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall
feed in another man’s field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard,
shall he make restitution.
6If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn,
or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
7If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out
of the man’s house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.
8If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to
seewhether he have put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods.
9For all manner of trespass, whether it befor ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, orfor any
manner of lost thing, which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall
come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his
neighbour.
10If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and
it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:
11Then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto
his neighbour’s goods; and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make itgood.
12And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
13If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it forwitness, and he shall not make good that
which was torn.
14And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof
being not with it, he shall surely make itgood.
15Butif the owner thereof bewith it, he shall not make itgood: if it bean hired thing, it came
for his hire.
16And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow
her to be his wife.
17If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry
of virgins.Exodus 22
174Exodus 22
18Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.
19Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.
20He that sacrificeth unto anygod, save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed.
21Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land
of Egypt.
22Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
23If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;
24And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be
widows, and your children fatherless.
25If thou lend money to any ofmy people that ispoor by thee, thou shalt not be to him
as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.
26If thou at all take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that
the sun goeth down:
27For that ishis covering only, it ishis raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it
shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I amgracious.
28Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.
29Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn
of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.
30Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his
dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.
31And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat anyflesh that istorn of beasts
in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.
175Exodus 22
Chapter 23
Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unright-
eous witness.
2Thou shalt not follow a multitude to doevil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline
after many to wrest judgment:
3Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.
4If thou meet thine enemy’s ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to
him again.
5If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to
help him, thou shalt surely help with him.
6Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
7Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will
not justify the wicked.
8And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of
the righteous.
9Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt.
10And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:
11But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat:
and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy
vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.
12Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and
thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.
13And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the
name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
14Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.
15Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven
days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest
out from Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:)
16And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field:
and the feast of ingathering, which isin the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy
labours out of the field.
17Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord GOD.
18Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of
my sacrifice remain until the morning.
19The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.Exodus 23
176Exodus 23
20Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into
the place which I have prepared.
21Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your trans-
gressions: for my name isin him.
22But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy
unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.
23For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites,
and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them
off.
24Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou
shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.
25And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I
will take sickness away from the midst of thee.
26There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy
days I will fulfil.
27I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come,
and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.
28And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and
the Hittite, from before thee.
29I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and
the beast of the field multiply against thee.
30By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and in-
herit the land.
31And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from
the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and
thou shalt drive them out before thee.
32Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
33They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their
gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.
177Exodus 23
Chapter 24
And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord , thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu,
and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.
2And Moses alone shall come near the Lord : but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the
people go up with him.
3And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord , and all the judgments:
and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath
said will we do.
4And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord , and rose up early in the morning, and builded
an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
5And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed
peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord .
6And Moses took half of the blood, and put itin basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled
on the altar.
7And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they
said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient.
8And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled iton the people, and said, Behold the blood of
the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.
9Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:
10And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a
sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in hisclearness.
11And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and
did eat and drink.
12And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I
will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou
mayest teach them.
13And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.
14And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, be-
hold, Aaron and Hur arewith you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto
them.
15And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.
16And the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and
the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
17And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in
the eyes of the children of Israel.
18And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses
was in the mount forty days and forty nights.Exodus 24
178Exodus 24
Chapter 25
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth
it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.
3And this isthe offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,
4And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
5And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
6Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,
7Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.
8And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.
9According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all
the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.
10And they shall make an ark ofshittim wood: two cubits and a half shall bethe length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
11And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and
shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.
12And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and
two rings shall bein the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.
13And thou shalt make staves ofshittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
14And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be
borne with them.
15The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.
16And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
17And thou shalt make a mercy seat ofpure gold: two cubits and a half shall bethe length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
18And thou shalt make two cherubims ofgold, ofbeaten work shalt thou make them, in the
two ends of the mercy seat.
19And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the
mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
20And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with
their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces
of the cherubims be.
21And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the
testimony that I shall give thee.
22And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat,
from between the two cherubims which areupon the ark of the testimony, of all things which
I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.Exodus 25
179Exodus 25
23Thou shalt also make a table ofshittim wood: two cubits shall bethe length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
24And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
25And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt
make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
26And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that
areon the four feet thereof.
27Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.
28And thou shalt make the staves ofshittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table
may be borne with them.
29And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls
thereof, to cover withal: ofpure gold shalt thou make them.
30And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.
31And thou shalt make a candlestick ofpure gold: ofbeaten work shall the candlestick
be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the
same.
32And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out
of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side:
33Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three
bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches
that come out of the candlestick.
34And in the candlestick shall befour bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and
their flowers.
35And there shall bea knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches
of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that
proceed out of the candlestick.
36Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall beone beaten work ofpure
gold.
37And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that
they may give light over against it.
38And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be ofpure gold.
39Ofa talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.
40And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount.
180Exodus 25
Chapter 26
Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains offine twined linen, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.
2The length of one curtain shall beeight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain
four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.
3The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shall be
coupled one to another.
4And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in
the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the
coupling of the second.
5Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge
of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of an-
other.
6And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches:
and it shall be one tabernacle.
7And thou shalt make curtains ofgoats’ hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven
curtains shalt thou make.
8The length of one curtain shall bethirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits:
and the eleven curtains shall be allof one measure.
9And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt
double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.
10And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that isoutmost in the
coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
11And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple
the tent together, that it may be one.
12And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth,
shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.
13And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the
length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side
and on that side, to cover it.
14And thou shalt make a covering for the tent oframs’ skins dyed red, and a covering above
ofbadgers' skins.
15And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle ofshittim wood standing up.
16Ten cubits shall bethe length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall bethe breadth of one
board.
17Two tenons shall there bein one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou
make for all the boards of the tabernacle.Exodus 26
181Exodus 26
18And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side
southward.
19And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under
one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
20And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall betwenty boards:
21And their forty sockets ofsilver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under an-
other board.
22And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
23And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
24And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the
head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
25And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets ofsilver, sixteen sockets; two sockets
under one board, and two sockets under another board.
26And thou shalt make bars ofshittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the
tabernacle,
27And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards
of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.
28And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.
29And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings ofgold forplaces for
the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.
30And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed
thee in the mount.
31And thou shalt make a vail ofblue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of
cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
32And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks
shall be ofgold, upon the four sockets of silver.
33And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither
within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy
place and the most holy.
34And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
35And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on
the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.
36And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, ofblue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.
37And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars ofshittim wood, and overlay them with
gold, and their hooks shall be ofgold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.
182Exodus 26
Chapter 27
And thou shalt make an altar ofshittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad;
the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall bethree cubits.
2And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of
the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.
3And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his
fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make ofbrass.
4And thou shalt make for it a grate of network ofbrass; and upon the net shalt thou make
four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.
5And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to
the midst of the altar.
6And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves ofshittim wood, and overlay them with
brass.
7And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the
altar, to bear it.
8Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they
make it.
9And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there
shall behangings for the court offine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side:
10And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be ofbrass; the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets shall be ofsilver.
11And likewise for the north side in length there shall behangings of an hundred cubits long,
and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets ofbrass; the hooks of the pillars and their
fillets ofsilver.
12And forthe breadth of the court on the west side shall behangings of fifty cubits: their
pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
13And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall befifty cubits.
14The hangings of one side of the gate shall befifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their
sockets three.
15And on the other side shall behangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets
three.
16And for the gate of the court shall bean hanging of twenty cubits, ofblue, and purple,
and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall befour,
and their sockets four.
17All the pillars round about the court shall befilleted with silver; their hooks shall be of
silver, and their sockets of brass.Exodus 27
183Exodus 27
18The length of the court shall bean hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where,
and the height five cubits offine twined linen, and their sockets ofbrass.
19All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all
the pins of the court, shall be ofbrass.
20And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive
beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.
21In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which isbefore the testimony,
Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the Lord : it shall bea
statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.
184Exodus 27
Chapter 28
And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the
children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office, even Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.
2And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.
3And thou shalt speak unto all that arewise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of
wisdom, that they may make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him, that he may minister
unto me in the priest’s office.
4And these arethe garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe,
and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron
thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
5And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.
6And they shall make the ephod ofgold, ofblue, and ofpurple, ofscarlet, and fine twined
linen, with cunning work.
7It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and soit shall
be joined together.
8And the curious girdle of the ephod, which isupon it, shall be of the same, according to
the work thereof; even ofgold, ofblue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
9And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:
10Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone,
according to their birth.
11With the work of an engraver in stone, likethe engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave
the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in
ouches of gold.
12And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod forstones of memorial
unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord upon his two
shoulders for a memorial.
13And thou shalt make ouches ofgold;
14And two chains ofpure gold at the ends; ofwreathen work shalt thou make them, and
fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.
15And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work
of the ephod thou shalt make it; ofgold, ofblue, and ofpurple, and ofscarlet, and offine
twined linen, shalt thou make it.
16Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall bethe length thereof, and a span shall
bethe breadth thereof.
17And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be
a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall bethe first row.Exodus 28
185Exodus 28
18And the second row shall bean emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
19And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
20And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their
inclosings.
21And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their
names, likethe engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to
the twelve tribes.
22And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends ofwreathen work ofpure
gold.
23And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings
on the two ends of the breastplate.
24And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which areon the ends
of the breastplate.
25And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches,
and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it.
26And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends
of the breastplate in the border thereof, which isin the side of the ephod inward.
27And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the
ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof,
above the curious girdle of the ephod.
28And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with
a lace of blue, that itmay be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate
be not loosed from the ephod.
29And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment
upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord con-
tinually.
30And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and
they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the Lord : and Aaron shall bear
the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord continually.
31And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all ofblue.
32And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of
woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not
rent.
33And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates ofblue, and ofpurple,
and ofscarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:
34A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the
robe round about.
186Exodus 28
35And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in
unto the holy place before the Lord , and when he cometh out, that he die not.
36And thou shalt make a plate ofpure gold, and grave upon it, likethe engravings of a
signet, HOLINESS TO THE Lord .
37And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of
the mitre it shall be.
38And it shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things,
which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon
his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord .
39And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre offine
linen, and thou shalt make the girdle ofneedlework.
40And for Aaron’s sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles,
and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.
41And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint
them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s
office.
42And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even
unto the thighs they shall reach:
43And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle
of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place;
that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall bea statute for ever unto him and his seed after
him.
187Exodus 28
Chapter 29
And this isthe thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me
in the priest’s office: Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,
2And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened
anointed with oil: ofwheaten flour shalt thou make them.
3And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock
and the two rams.
4And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
and shalt wash them with water.
5And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod,
and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:
6And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
7Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour itupon his head, and anoint him.
8And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.
9And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them:
and the priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron
and his sons.
10And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation:
and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
11And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord , bythe door of the tabernacle of the con-
gregation.
12And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put itupon the horns of the altar with
thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.
13And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that isabove the
liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.
14But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without
the camp: it isa sin offering.
15Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the
head of the ram.
16And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle itround about
upon the altar.
17And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put
them unto his pieces, and unto his head.
18And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it isa burnt offering unto the Lord : it
isa sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the Lord .
19And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon
the head of the ram.Exodus 29
188Exodus 29
20Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put itupon the tip of the right ear
of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right
hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round
about.
21And thou shalt take of the blood that isupon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle
itupon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his
sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ gar-
ments with him.
22Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that isupon them, and the
right shoulder; for it isa ram of consecration:
23And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the
unleavened bread that isbefore the Lord :
24And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave
them fora wave offering before the Lord .
25And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt of-
fering, for a sweet savour before the Lord : it isan offering made by fire unto the Lord .
26And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s consecration, and wave it fora wave
offering before the Lord : and it shall be thy part.
27And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave of-
fering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that
which isfor Aaron, and of that which is for his sons:
28And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for
it isan heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the
sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the Lord .
29And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein,
and to be consecrated in them.
30And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into
the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place.
31And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.
32And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that isin the basket,
bythe door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
33And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to
sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they areholy.
34And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning,
then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it isholy.
35And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I have
commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
189Exodus 29
36And thou shalt offer every day a bullock fora sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt
cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to
sanctify it.
37Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an
altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.
38Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day
by day continually.
39The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:
40And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of
beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine fora drink offering.
41And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat
offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an
offering made by fire unto the Lord .
42This shall bea continual burnt offering throughout your generations atthe door of the
tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord : where I will meet you, to speak there unto
thee.
43And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by
my glory.
44And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also
both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest’s office.
45And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
46And they shall know that I amthe Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land
of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I amthe Lord their God.
190Exodus 29
Chapter 30
And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: ofshittim wood shalt thou make
it.
2A cubit shall bethe length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be:
and two cubits shall bethe height thereof: the horns thereof shall beof the same.
3And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about,
and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
4And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners
thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it;and they shall be for places for the staves
to bear it withal.
5And thou shalt make the staves ofshittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
6And thou shalt put it before the vail that isby the ark of the testimony, before the mercy
seat that isover the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
7And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps,
he shall burn incense upon it.
8And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual in-
cense before the Lord throughout your generations.
9Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither
shall ye pour drink offering thereon.
10And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood
of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it
throughout your generations: it ismost holy unto the Lord .
11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
12When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give
every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord , when thou numberest them; that there be
no plague among them, when thou numberest them.
13This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel
after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel istwenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall bethe offering
of the Lord .
14Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above,
shall give an offering unto the Lord .
15The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they
give an offering unto the Lord , to make an atonement for your souls.
16And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it
for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the
children of Israel before the Lord , to make an atonement for your souls.
17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,Exodus 30
191Exodus 30
18Thou shalt also make a laver ofbrass, and his foot also ofbrass, to wash withal: and thou
shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put
water therein.
19For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:
20When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that
they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire
unto the Lord :
21So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for
ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.
22Moreover the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
23Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet
cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two
hundred and fifty shekels,
24And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an
hin:
25And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of
the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.
26And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the
testimony,
27And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense,
28And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.
29And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall
be holy.
30And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister
unto me in the priest’s office.
31And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing
oil unto me throughout your generations.
32Upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the
composition of it: it isholy, and it shall be holy unto you.
33Whosoever compoundeth anylike it, or whosoever putteth anyof it upon a stranger, shall
even be cut off from his people.
34And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and
galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:
35And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered
together, pure and holy:
36And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the taber-
nacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.
192Exodus 30
37And as forthe perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according
to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord .
38Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.
193Exodus 30
Chapter 31
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:
3And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
4To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
5And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of
workmanship.
6And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan:
and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that
I have commanded thee;
7The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that
isthereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle,
8And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar
of incense,
9And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot,
10And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments
of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office,
11And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have
commanded thee shall they do.
12And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
13Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for
it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am
the Lord that doth sanctify you.
14Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it isholy unto you: every one that defileth it shall
surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth anywork therein, that soul shall be cut off from
among his people.
15Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord :
whosoever doeth anywork in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
16Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout
their generations, fora perpetual covenant.
17It isa sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for insix days the Lord made
heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
18And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon
mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.Exodus 31
194Exodus 31
Chapter 32
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the
people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods,
which shall go before us; for as forthis Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land
of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
2And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which arein the ears of your
wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me.
3And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them
unto Aaron.
4And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made
it a molten calf: and they said, These bethy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt.
5And when Aaron saw it,he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and
said, To morrow isa feast to the Lord .
6And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace of-
ferings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.
7And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou
broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:
8They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made
them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These
bethy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
9And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it isa stiffnecked
people:
10Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may
consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.
11And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord , why doth thy wrath wax hot against
thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and
with a mighty hand?
12Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to
slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from
thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.
13Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own
self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land
that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit itfor ever.
14And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.
15And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony
were in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the
other were they written.Exodus 32
195Exodus 32
16And the tables were the work of God, and the writing wasthe writing of God, graven upon
the tables.
17And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There
isa noise of war in the camp.
18And he said, It isnot the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is itthe voice of
them that cry for being overcome: butthe noise of them that sing do I hear.
19And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and
the dancing: and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake
them beneath the mount.
20And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt itin the fire, and ground itto powder,
and strawed itupon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
21And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so
great a sin upon them?
22And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are seton mischief.
23For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for as forthis Moses, the
man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
24And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break itoff. So they gave itme:
then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
25And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked
unto their shame among their enemies:)
26Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who ison the Lord ’S side? let him
come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
27And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by
his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.
28And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people
that day about three thousand men.
29For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the Lord , even every man upon his
son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.
30And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned
a great sin: and now I will go up unto the Lord ; peradventure I shall make an atonement for
your sin.
31And Moses returned unto the Lord , and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and
have made them gods of gold.
32Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book
which thou hast written.
196Exodus 32
33And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of
my book.
34Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee: behold,
mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin
upon them.
35And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.
197Exodus 32
Chapter 33
And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which
thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it:
2And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and
the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:
3Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou
arta stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way.
4And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on
him his ornaments.
5For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye area stiffnecked
people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now
put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.
6And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.
7And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp,
and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, that every one which
sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the
camp.
8And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up,
and stood every man athis tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the
tabernacle.
9And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and
stood atthe door of the tabernacle, and theLord talked with Moses.
10And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand atthe tabernacle door: and all the people
rose up and worshipped, every man inhis tent door.
11And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he
turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed
not out of the tabernacle.
12And Moses said unto the Lord , See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and
thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee
by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight.
13Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that
I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation isthy
people.
14And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.
15And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me,carry us not up hence.Exodus 33
198Exodus 33
16For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is
itnot in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the
people that areupon the face of the earth.
17And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou
hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.
18And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.
19And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name
of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy
on whom I will shew mercy.
20And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.
21And the Lord said, Behold, there isa place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:
22And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the
rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by:
23And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not
be seen.
199Exodus 33
Chapter 34
And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I
will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.
2And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present
thyself there to me in the top of the mount.
3And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount;
neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
4And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the
morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his
hand the two tables of stone.
5And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name
of the Lord .
6And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord , The Lord God, merciful
and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
7Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will
by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon
the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.
8And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.
9And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go
among us; for it isa stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us
for thine inheritance.
10And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such
as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which
thou artshall see the work of the Lord : for it isa terrible thing that I will do with thee.
11Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the
Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebus-
ite.
12Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither
thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:
13But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves:
14For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord , whose name isJealous, isa jealous God:
15Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after
their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and onecall thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;
16And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after
their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
17Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.Exodus 34
200Exodus 34
18The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened
bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou
camest out from Egypt.
19All that openeth the matrix ismine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or
sheep, that is male.
20But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then
shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall
appear before me empty.
21Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and
in harvest thou shalt rest.
22And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the
feast of ingathering at the year’s end.
23Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the Lord GOD, the God
of Israel.
24For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man
desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year.
25Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the
feast of the passover be left unto the morning.
26The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.
27And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words
I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
28And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor
drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
29And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables
of testimony in Moses’ hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that
the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.
30And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face
shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.
31And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned
unto him: and Moses talked with them.
32And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment
all that the Lord had spoken with him in mount Sinai.
33And tillMoses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.
34But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he
came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was com-
manded.
201Exodus 34
35And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone: and
Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.
202Exodus 34
Chapter 35
And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said
unto them, These arethe words which the Lord hath commanded, that yeshould do them.
2Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a
sabbath of rest to the Lord : whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.
3Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.
4And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This isthe
thing which the Lord commanded, saying,
5Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord : whosoever isof a willing heart, let him
bring it, an offering of the Lord ; gold, and silver, and brass,
6And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair,
7And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
8And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,
9And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
10And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the Lord hath com-
manded;
11The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars,
and his sockets,
12The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering,
13The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,
14The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the
light,
15And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and
the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle,
16The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver
and his foot,
17The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of
the court,
18The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,
19The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the
priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office.
20And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
21And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit
made willing, and they brought the Lord ’S offering to the work of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.Exodus 35
203Exodus 35
22And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought
bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered
offered an offering of gold unto the Lord .
23And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and
goats’ hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought them.
24Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the Lord ’S offering: and
every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it.
25And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that
which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.
26And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats’ hair.
27And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the
breastplate;
28And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
29The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the Lord , every man and woman,
whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the Lord had com-
manded to be made by the hand of Moses.
30And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the Lord hath called by name Bezaleel
the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;
31And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;
32And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
33And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of
cunning work.
34And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach,
of the tribe of Dan.
35Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver,
and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and
in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise
cunning work.
204Exodus 35
Chapter 36
Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the Lord
put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of
the sanctuary, according to all that the Lord had commanded.
2And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the
Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work
to do it:
3And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for
the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. And they brought yet unto him
free offerings every morning.
4And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from
his work which they made;
5And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the
service of the work, which the Lord commanded to make.
6And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp,
saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary.
So the people were restrained from bringing.
7For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.
8And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle
made ten curtains offine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims
of cunning work made he them.
9The length of one curtain wastwenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four
cubits: the curtains were all of one size.
10And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled
one unto another.
11And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling:
likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.
12Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain
which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.
13And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the
taches: so it became one tabernacle.
14And he made curtains ofgoats’ hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains
he made them.
15The length of one curtain wasthirty cubits, and four cubits wasthe breadth of one curtain:
the eleven curtains were of one size.
16And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.Exodus 36
205Exodus 36
17And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty
loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
18And he made fifty taches ofbrass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
19And he made a covering for the tent oframs’ skins dyed red, and a covering ofbadgers’
skins above that.
20And he made boards for the tabernacle ofshittim wood, standing up.
21The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.
22One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the
boards of the tabernacle.
23And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward:
24And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board
for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
25And for the other side of the tabernacle, which istoward the north corner, he made twenty
boards,
26And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under
another board.
27And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
28And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
29And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring:
thus he did to both of them in both the corners.
30And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every
board two sockets.
31And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
32And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards
of the tabernacle for the sides westward.
33And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.
34And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings ofgold to beplaces for the
bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
35And he made a vail ofblue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cher-
ubims made he it of cunning work.
36And he made thereunto four pillars ofshittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their
hooks were ofgold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
37And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door ofblue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen, of needlework;
38And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets
with gold: but their five sockets were ofbrass.
206Exodus 36
Chapter 37
And Bezaleel made the ark ofshittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it,
and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:
2And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round
about.
3And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be setby the four corners of it; even two rings upon
the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.
4And he made staves ofshittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
5And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
6And he made the mercy seat ofpure gold: two cubits and a half wasthe length thereof,
and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
7And he made two cherubims ofgold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two
ends of the mercy seat;
8One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out
of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
9And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the
mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the
cherubims.
10And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits wasthe length thereof, and a cubit
the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof:
11And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
12Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of
gold for the border thereof round about.
13And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in
the four feet thereof.
14Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.
15And he made the staves ofshittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
16And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his
bowls, and his covers to cover withal, ofpure gold.
17And he made the candlestick ofpure gold: ofbeaten work made he the candlestick;
his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:
18And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of
the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof:
19Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and
three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the
six branches going out of the candlestick.
20And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers:Exodus 37
207Exodus 37
21And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same,
and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.
22Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work ofpure
gold.
23And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, ofpure gold.
24Ofa talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.
25And he made the incense altar ofshittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the
breadth of it a cubit; it wasfoursquare; and two cubits wasthe height of it; the horns thereof
were of the same.
26And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about,
and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.
27And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it,
upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.
28And he made the staves ofshittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
29And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according
to the work of the apothecary.
208Exodus 37
Chapter 38
And he made the altar of burnt offering ofshittim wood: five cubits was the length
thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and three cubits the height
thereof.
2And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the
same: and he overlaid it with brass.
3And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the
fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he ofbrass.
4And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath
unto the midst of it.
5And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to beplaces for the staves.
6And he made the staves ofshittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.
7And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the
altar hollow with boards.
8And he made the laver ofbrass, and the foot of it ofbrass, of the lookingglasses of the
women assembling, which assembled atthe door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
9And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of
fine twined linen, an hundred cubits:
10Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and
their fillets were ofsilver.
11And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and
their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets ofsilver.
12And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten;
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets ofsilver.
13And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
14The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their
sockets three.
15And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen
cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
16All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
17And the sockets for the pillars were ofbrass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of
silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters ofsilver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted
with silver.
18And the hanging for the gate of the court wasneedlework, ofblue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was
five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.Exodus 38
209Exodus 38
19And their pillars were four, and their sockets ofbrass four; their hooks ofsilver, and the
overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets ofsilver.
20And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were ofbrass.
21This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted,
according to the commandment of Moses, forthe service of the Levites, by the hand of
Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.
22And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the Lord
commanded Moses.
23And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a
cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.
24All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold
of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the
shekel of the sanctuary.
25And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents,
and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary:
26A bekah for every man, that is,half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every
one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand
and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
27And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets
of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
28And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars,
and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.
29And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred
shekels.
30And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and
the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
31And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the
pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.
210Exodus 38
Chapter 39
And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in
the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the Lord commanded Moses.
2And he made the ephod ofgold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
3And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work itin the blue, and
in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.
4They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple ittogether: by the two edges was it coupled to-
gether.
5And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, according to the
work thereof; ofgold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the Lord com-
manded Moses.
6And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven,
with the names of the children of Israel.
7And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should bestones for a memorial
to the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses.
8And he made the breastplate ofcunning work, like the work of the ephod; ofgold, blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
9It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a
span the breadth thereof, being doubled.
10And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row wasa sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
this was the first row.
11And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
12And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
13And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold
in their inclosings.
14And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according
to their names, likethe engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the
twelve tribes.
15And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, ofwreathen work ofpure gold.
16And they made two ouches ofgold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two
ends of the breastplate.
17And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breast-
plate.
18And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put
them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.
19And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon
the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward.Exodus 39
211Exodus 39
20And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod under-
neath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious
girdle of the ephod.
21And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of
blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might
not be loosed from the ephod; as the Lord commanded Moses.
22And he made the robe of the ephod ofwoven work, all ofblue.
23And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band
round about the hole, that it should not rend.
24And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates ofblue, and purple, and scarlet,
and twined linen.
25And they made bells ofpure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the
hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates;
26A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to
minister in;as the Lord commanded Moses.
27And they made coats offine linen ofwoven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
28And a mitre offine linen, and goodly bonnets offine linen, and linen breeches offine
twined linen,
29And a girdle offine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, ofneedlework; as the
Lord commanded Moses.
30And they made the plate of the holy crown ofpure gold, and wrote upon it a writing,
like tothe engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE Lord .
31And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten iton high upon the mitre; as the Lord com-
manded Moses.
32Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and
the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.
33And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches,
his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets,
34And the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers’ skins, and the vail
of the covering,
35The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
36The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,
37The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and
all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
38And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for
the tabernacle door,
39The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his
foot,
212Exodus 39
40The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate,
his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the
congregation,
41The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the
priest, and his sons’ garments, to minister in the priest’s office.
42According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the
work.
43And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the Lord had
commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.
213Exodus 39
Chapter 40
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the con-
gregation.
3And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.
4And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order
upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.
5And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put
the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.
6And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the
tent of the congregation.
7And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt
put water therein.
8And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.
9And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that istherein, and
shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.
10And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the
altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.
11And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.
12And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congrega-
tion, and wash them with water.
13And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him;
that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
14And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:
15And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto
me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood
throughout their generations.
16Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he.
17And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first dayof the month,
that the tabernacle was reared up.
18And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards
thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.
19And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above
upon it; as the Lord commanded Moses.
20And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put
the mercy seat above upon the ark:Exodus 40
214Exodus 40
21And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered
the ark of the testimony; as the Lord commanded Moses.
22And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle
northward, without the vail.
23And he set the bread in order upon it before the Lord ; as the Lord had commanded Moses.
24And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on
the side of the tabernacle southward.
25And he lighted the lamps before the Lord ; as the Lord commanded Moses.
26And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail:
27And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the Lord commanded Moses.
28And he set up the hanging atthe door of the tabernacle.
29And he put the altar of burnt offering bythe door of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the Lord
commanded Moses.
30And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water
there, to wash withal.
31And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat:
32When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar,
they washed; as the Lord commanded Moses.
33And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging
of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.
34Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the
tabernacle.
35And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud
abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.
36And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went
onward in all their journeys:
37But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken
up.
38For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in
the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.
215Exodus 40
The Second Book of Moses, called
LeviticusLeviticus
216Leviticus
Chapter 1
And the Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the con-
gregation, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an offering
unto the Lord , ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock.
3If his offering bea burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall
offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the Lord .
4And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it shall be accepted for
him to make atonement for him.
5And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord : and the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall bring the
blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is bythe door of the tabernacle
of the congregation.
6And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.
7And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order
upon the fire:
8And the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the
wood that ison the fire which isupon the altar:
9But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar,
to bea burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
10And if his offering beof the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt
sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without blemish.
11And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the Lord : and the priests,
Aaron’s sons, shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar.
12And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shall lay them
in order on the wood that ison the fire which isupon the altar:
13But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shall bring itall, and
burn itupon the altar: it isa burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the Lord .
14And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord beof fowls, then he shall bring
his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons.
15And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his head, and burn iton the altar;
and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar:
16And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east
part, by the place of the ashes:Leviticus 1
217Leviticus 1
17And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, butshall not divide itasunder: and the priest
shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that isupon the fire: it isa burnt sacrifice, an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
218Leviticus 1
Chapter 2
And when any will offer a meat offering unto the Lord , his offering shall be offine flour;
and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon:
2And he shall bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of
the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall
burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to bean offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the Lord :
3And the remnant of the meat offering shall beAaron’s and his sons’: it isa thing most holy
of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.
4And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven, it shall beunleavened
cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
5And if thy oblation bea meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be offine flour unleavened,
mingled with oil.
6Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it isa meat offering.
7And if thy oblation bea meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it shall be made offine
flour with oil.
8And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things unto the Lord : and
when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar.
9And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn itupon
the altar: it isan offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
10And that which is left of the meat offering shall beAaron’s and his sons’: it isa thing most
holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.
11No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord , shall be made with leaven: for ye
shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the Lord made by fire.
12As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the Lord : but they shall
not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.
13And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou
suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine
offerings thou shalt offer salt.
14And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the Lord , thou shalt offer for the
meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of
full ears.
15And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it isa meat offering.
16And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, and part of
the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: it isan offering made by fire unto the Lord .Leviticus 2
219Leviticus 2
Chapter 3
And if his oblation bea sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer itof the herd; whether it
bea male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the Lord .
2And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it atthe door of the taber-
nacle of the congregation: and Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the
altar round about.
3And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the
Lord ; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that isupon the inwards,
4And the two kidneys, and the fat that ison them, which isby the flanks, and the caul above
the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
5And Aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which isupon the
wood that ison the fire: it isan offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
6And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the Lord beof the flock; male
or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
7If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before the Lord .
8And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of
the congregation: and Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the
altar.
9And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the
Lord ; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the
fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that isupon the inwards,
10And the two kidneys, and the fat that isupon them, which isby the flanks, and the caul
above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
11And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it isthe food of the offering made by fire unto
the Lord .
12And if his offering bea goat, then he shall offer it before the Lord .
13And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the con-
gregation: and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.
14And he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord ; the
fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that isupon the inwards,
15And the two kidneys, and the fat that isupon them, which isby the flanks, and the caul
above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
16And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it isthe food of the offering made by fire
for a sweet savour: all the fat isthe Lord ’S.
17It shall bea perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye
eat neither fat nor blood.Leviticus 3
220Leviticus 3
Chapter 4
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any
of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall
do against any of them:
3If the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the Lord for a sin
offering.
4And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the Lord ; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock’s head, and kill the bullock before the
Lord .
5And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock’s blood, and bring it to the tabernacle
of the congregation:
6And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before
the Lord , before the vail of the sanctuary.
7And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before
the Lord , which isin the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the
bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is atthe door of the tabernacle
of the congregation.
8And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin offering; the fat that covereth
the inwards, and all the fat that isupon the inwards,
9And the two kidneys, and the fat that isupon them, which isby the flanks, and the caul
above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away,
10As it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall
burn them upon the altar of the burnt offering.
11And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his in-
wards, and his dung,
12Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where
the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured
out shall he be burnt.
13And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid
from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the command-
ments of the Lord concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty;
14When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall
offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation.
15And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before
the Lord : and the bullock shall be killed before the Lord .Leviticus 4
221Leviticus 4
16And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock’s blood to the tabernacle of the
congregation:
17And the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle itseven times before
the Lord , even before the vail.
18And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar which isbefore the Lord ,
that isin the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom
of the altar of the burnt offering, which is atthe door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
19And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn itupon the altar.
20And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sin offering, so shall he
do with this: and the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.
21And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the
first bullock: it isa sin offering for the congregation.
22When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance against any of the
commandments of the Lord his God concerning things which should not be done, and is
guilty;
23Or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering,
a kid of the goats, a male without blemish:
24And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill
the burnt offering before the Lord : it isa sin offering.
25And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put itupon
the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the
altar of burnt offering.
26And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings:
and the priest shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven
him.
27And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat
against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be
done, and be guilty;
28Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering,
a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned.
29And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay the sin offering in
the place of the burnt offering.
30And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put itupon the horns
of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the
altar.
31And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of
peace offerings; and the priest shall burn itupon the altar for a sweet savour unto the Lord ;
and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.
222Leviticus 4
32And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
33And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay it for a sin offering
in the place where they kill the burnt offering.
34And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put itupon
the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom
of the altar:
35And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the
sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to
the offerings made by fire unto the Lord : and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin
that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.
223Leviticus 4
Chapter 5
And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and isa witness, whether he hath seen
or known of it;if he do not utter it,then he shall bear his iniquity.
2Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it bea carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase
of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and ifit be hidden from him;
he also shall be unclean, and guilty.
3Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it bethat a man shall be
defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it,then he shall be guilty.
4Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with hislips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it bethat
a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it,then
he shall be guilty in one of these.
5And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that he
hath sinned in that thing:
6And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord for his sin which he hath sinned, a
female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall
make an atonement for him concerning his sin.
7And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath
committed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the Lord ; one for a sin offering,
and the other for a burnt offering.
8And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which isfor the sin offering
first, and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide itasunder:
9And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest
of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it isa sin offering.
10And he shall offer the second fora burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest
shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven
him.
11But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that
sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering;
he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put anyfrankincense thereon: for it isa sin offer-
ing.
12Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, even a me-
morial thereof, and burn iton the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the
Lord : it isa sin offering.
13And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned
in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and the remnant shall be the priest’s, as a meat
offering.
14And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,Leviticus 5
224Leviticus 5
15If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the Lord ;
then he shall bring for his trespass unto the Lord a ram without blemish out of the flocks,
with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offer-
ing:
16And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall
add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement
for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.
17And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to be done by
the commandments of the Lord ; though he wist itnot, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his
iniquity.
18And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a
trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning
his ignorance wherein he erred and wist itnot, and it shall be forgiven him.
19It isa trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the Lord .
225Leviticus 5
Chapter 6
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord , and lie unto his neighbour in that
which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or
hath deceived his neighbour;
3Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of
all these that a man doeth, sinning therein:
4Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he
took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered
him to keep, or the lost thing which he found,
5Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and
shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the
day of his trespass offering.
6And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord , a ram without blemish out of the
flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest:
7And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord : and it shall be forgiven
him for any thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein.
8And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
9Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This isthe law of the burnt offering: It isthe burnt
offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of
the altar shall be burning in it.
10And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon
his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the
altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.
11And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes
without the camp unto a clean place.
12And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest
shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he
shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.
13The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out.
14And this isthe law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the
Lord , before the altar.
15And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof,
and all the frankincense which isupon the meat offering, and shall burn itupon the altar
fora sweet savour, even the memorial of it, unto the Lord .Leviticus 6
226Leviticus 6
16And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it
be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat
it.
17It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them fortheir portion of my offerings
made by fire; it ismost holy, as isthe sin offering, and as the trespass offering.
18All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It shall bea statute for ever in
your generations concerning the offerings of the Lord made by fire: every one that toucheth
them shall be holy.
19And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
20This isthe offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the Lord in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual,
half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night.
21In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it isbaken, thou shalt bring it in: and the
baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer fora sweet savour unto the Lord .
22And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer it: it isa statute for ever
unto the Lord ; it shall be wholly burnt.
23For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.
24And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
25Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This isthe law of the sin offering: In the place
where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the Lord : it ismost
holy.
26The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court
of the tabernacle of the congregation.
27Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the
blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy
place.
28But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen
pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.
29All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it ismost holy.
30And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the con-
gregation to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.
227Leviticus 6
Chapter 7
Likewise this isthe law of the trespass offering: it ismost holy.
2In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the trespass offering: and the
blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about upon the altar.
3And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
4And the two kidneys, and the fat that ison them, which isby the flanks, and the caul that
isabove the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away:
5And the priest shall burn them upon the altar foran offering made by fire unto the Lord :
it isa trespass offering.
6Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it ismost
holy.
7As the sin offering is,so isthe trespass offering: there isone law for them: the priest that
maketh atonement therewith shall have it.
8And the priest that offereth any man’s burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself
the skin of the burnt offering which he hath offered.
9And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan,
and in the pan, shall be the priest’s that offereth it.
10And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one
as much as another.
11And this isthe law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the Lord .
12If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving un-
leavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled
with oil, of fine flour, fried.
13Besides the cakes, he shall offer forhis offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of
thanksgiving of his peace offerings.
14And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation foran heave offering unto the Lord ,
and it shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.
15And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same
day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
16But if the sacrifice of his offering bea vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the
same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be
eaten:
17But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.
18And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third
day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be
an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.Leviticus 7
228Leviticus 7
19And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with
fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.
20But the soul that eateth ofthe flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain unto
the Lord , having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.
21Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, asthe uncleanness of man, or any
unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
offerings, which pertain unto the Lord , even that soul shall be cut off from his people.
22And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
23Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep,
or of goat.
24And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts,
may be used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
25For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire
unto the Lord , even the soul that eateth itshall be cut off from his people.
26Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it beof fowl or of beast, in any of your
dwellings.
27Whatsoever soul it bethat eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from
his people.
28And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
29Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings
unto the Lord shall bring his oblation unto the Lord of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.
30His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire, the fat with the breast,
it shall he bring, that the breast may be waved fora wave offering before the Lord .
31And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron’s and his
sons’.
32And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest foran heave offering of the sacrifices
of your peace offerings.
33He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat,
shall have the right shoulder for hispart.
34For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off
the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto
his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel.
35This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of
the offerings of the Lord made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister unto
the Lord in the priest’s office;
36Which the Lord commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he
anointed them, bya statute for ever throughout their generations.
229Leviticus 7
37This isthe law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and of the sin offering, and of
the trespass offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings;
38Which the Lord commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the
children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the Lord , in the wilderness of Sinai.
230Leviticus 7
Chapter 8
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock
for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread;
3And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle of the con-
gregation.
4And Moses did as the Lord commanded him; and the assembly was gathered together unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
5And Moses said unto the congregation, This isthe thing which the Lord commanded to
be done.
6And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.
7And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the
robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod,
and bound itunto him therewith.
8And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the
Thummim.
9And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon his forefront, did he
put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the Lord commanded Moses.
10And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein,
and sanctified them.
11And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his
vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them.
12And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron’s head, and anointed him, to sanctify
him.
13And Moses brought Aaron’s sons, and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles,
and put bonnets upon them; as the Lord commanded Moses.
14And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands
upon the head of the bullock for the sin offering.
15And he slew it;and Moses took the blood, and put itupon the horns of the altar round
about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar,
and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it.
16And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the
two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned itupon the altar.
17But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp;
as the Lord commanded Moses.
18And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their
hands upon the head of the ram.Leviticus 8
231Leviticus 8
19And he killed it;and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
20And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.
21And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon
the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour, and an offering made by fire unto the
Lord ; as the Lord commanded Moses.
22And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid
their hands upon the head of the ram.
23And he slew it;and Moses took of the blood of it, and put itupon the tip of Aaron’s right
ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
24And he brought Aaron’s sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear,
and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right feet: and
Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
25And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that wasupon the inwards, and the caul
above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder:
26And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the Lord , he took one un-
leavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the fat, and upon
the right shoulder:
27And he put all upon Aaron’s hands, and upon his sons’ hands, and waved them fora wave
offering before the Lord .
28And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt
offering: they were consecrations for a sweet savour: it isan offering made by fire unto the
Lord .
29And Moses took the breast, and waved it fora wave offering before the Lord : forof the
ram of consecration it was Moses’ part; as the Lord commanded Moses.
30And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the altar, and
sprinkled itupon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons’
garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’
garments with him.
31And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation: and there eat it with the bread that isin the basket of consecrations, as
I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
32And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire.
33And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation inseven days,
until the days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.
34As he hath done this day, sothe Lord hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for
you.
35Therefore shall ye abide atthe door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night
seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord , that ye die not: for so I am commanded.
232Leviticus 8
36So Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
233Leviticus 8
Chapter 9
And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the
elders of Israel;
2And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt
offering, without blemish, and offer them before the Lord .
3And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin
offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering;
4Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the Lord ; and a meat offering
mingled with oil: for to day the Lord will appear unto you.
5And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tabernacle of the congreg-
ation: and all the congregation drew near and stood before the Lord .
6And Moses said, This isthe thing which the Lord commanded that ye should do: and the
glory of the Lord shall appear unto you.
7And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt
offering, and make an atonement for thyself, and for the people: and offer the offering of
the people, and make an atonement for them; as the Lord commanded.
8Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin offering, which was
for himself.
9And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped his finger in the blood,
and put itupon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar:
10But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he burnt upon
the altar; as the Lord commanded Moses.
11And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.
12And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which
he sprinkled round about upon the altar.
13And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces thereof, and the head:
and he burnt them upon the altar.
14And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt offering on
the altar.
15And he brought the people’s offering, and took the goat, which was the sin offering
for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first.
16And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to the manner.
17And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof, and burnt itupon the
altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.
18He slew also the bullock and the ram fora sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the
people: and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar
round about,Leviticus 9
234Leviticus 9
19And the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards,
and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
20And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar:
21And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved fora wave offering before the Lord ;
as Moses commanded.
22And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them, and came down from
offering of the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and peace offerings.
23And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and
blessed the people: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people.
24And there came a fire out from before the Lord , and consumed upon the altar the burnt
offering and the fat: which when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.
235Leviticus 9
Chapter 10
And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire
therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord , which he com-
manded them not.
2And there went out fire from the Lord , and devoured them, and they died before the Lord .
3Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is itthat the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in
them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his
peace.
4And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said
unto them, Come near, carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
5So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said.
6And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not
your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon all the people:
but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord hath
kindled.
7And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for
the anointing oil of the Lord isupon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.
8And the Lord spake unto Aaron, saying,
9Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall bea statute for ever throughout your
generations:
10And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean;
11And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord hath spoken
unto them by the hand of Moses.
12And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were
left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and eat
it without leaven beside the altar: for it ismost holy:
13And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it isthy due, and thy sons’ due, of the sacrifices
of the Lord made by fire: for so I am commanded.
14And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons,
and thy daughters with thee: for they bethy due, and thy sons’ due, which are given out of
the sacrifices of peace offerings of the children of Israel.
15The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the offerings made by fire
of the fat, to wave it fora wave offering before the Lord ; and it shall be thine, and thy sons’
with thee, by a statute for ever; as the Lord hath commanded.
16And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt:
and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying,Leviticus 10
236Leviticus 10
17Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it ismost holy, and
God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them
before the Lord ?
18Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.
19And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their sin offering and their
burnt offering before the Lord ; and such things have befallen me: and ifI had eaten the sin
offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord ?
20And when Moses heard that, he was content.
237Leviticus 10
Chapter 11
And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These arethe beasts which ye shall eat among all
the beasts that areon the earth.
3Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts,
that shall ye eat.
4Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the
hoof: asthe camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean
unto you.
5And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he isunclean unto
you.
6And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he isunclean unto
you.
7And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet he cheweth not the
cud; he isunclean to you.
8Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch; they areunclean to you.
9These shall ye eat of all that arein the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the
waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall ye eat.
10And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the
waters, and of any living thing which isin the waters, they shall bean abomination unto
you:
11They shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall
have their carcases in abomination.
12Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall bean abomination unto you.
13And these are they which yeshall have in abomination among the fowls; they shall
not be eaten, they arean abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
14And the vulture, and the kite after his kind;
15Every raven after his kind;
16And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,
17And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl,
18And the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle,
19And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.
20All fowls that creep, going upon allfour, shall bean abomination unto you.
21Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon allfour, which have
legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth;
22Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind,
and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.Leviticus 11
238Leviticus 11
23But all other flying creeping things, which have four feet, shall bean abomination unto
you.
24And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean
until the even.
25And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean
until the even.
26The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and isnot clovenfooted, nor cheweth
the cud, areunclean unto you: every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.
27And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on allfour,
those areunclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even.
28And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the
even: they areunclean unto you.
29These also shall beunclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the
earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind,
30And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
31These areunclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth touch them, when they
be dead, shall be unclean until the even.
32And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean;
whether it beany vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be,wherein
anywork is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it shall
be cleansed.
33And every earthen vessel, whereinto anyof them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean;
and ye shall break it.
34Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh shall be unclean: and
all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean.
35And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth shall be unclean; whether it
beoven, or ranges for pots, they shall be broken down: forthey areunclean, and shall be
unclean unto you.
36Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there isplenty of water, shall be clean: but that
which toucheth their carcase shall be unclean.
37And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it shall be
clean.
38But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their carcase fall thereon, it shall
beunclean unto you.
39And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the carcase thereof shall be
unclean until the even.
40And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even:
he also that beareth the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
239Leviticus 11
41And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall bean abomination; it shall
not be eaten.
42Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon allfour, or whatsoever hath
more feet among all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for
they arean abomination.
43Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creepeth, neither
shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.
44For I amthe Lord your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy;
for I amholy: neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth.
45For I amthe Lord that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall
therefore be holy, for I amholy.
46This isthe law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in
the waters, and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth:
47To make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may
be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten.
240Leviticus 11
Chapter 12
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man
child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for her
infirmity shall she be unclean.
3And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
4And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days; she shall
touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be
fulfilled.
5But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and
she shall continue in the blood of her purifying threescore and six days.
6And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring
a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin
offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
7Who shall offer it before the Lord , and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed
from the issue of her blood. This isthe law for her that hath born a male or a female.
8And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons;
the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an
atonement for her, and she shall be clean.Leviticus 12
241Leviticus 12
Chapter 13
And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,
2When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in
the skin of his flesh likethe plague of leprosy; then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest,
or unto one of his sons the priests:
3And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and when the hair in the
plague is turned white, and the plague in sight bedeeper than the skin of his flesh, it isa
plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.
4If the bright spot bewhite in the skin of his flesh, and in sight benot deeper than the skin,
and the hair thereof be not turned white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the
plague seven days:
5And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and, behold, ifthe plague in his sight be
at a stay, and the plague spread not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days
more:
6And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and, behold, ifthe plague be
somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean:
it is buta scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
7But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath been seen of the priest
for his cleansing, he shall be seen of the priest again:
8And ifthe priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shall pro-
nounce him unclean: it isa leprosy.
9When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto the priest;
10And the priest shall see him: and, behold, ifthe rising bewhite in the skin, and it have
turned the hair white, and there bequick raw flesh in the rising;
11It isan old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean,
and shall not shut him up: for he isunclean.
12And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of him
that hath the plague from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh;
13Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, ifthe leprosy have covered all his flesh, he
shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned white: he isclean.
14But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.
15And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be unclean: forthe raw flesh
isunclean: it isa leprosy.
16Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shall come unto the priest;
17And the priest shall see him: and, behold, ifthe plague be turned into white; then the priest
shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he isclean.
18The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil, and is healed,Leviticus 13
242Leviticus 13
19And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat
reddish, and it be shewed to the priest;
20And if, when the priest seeth it, behold, it bein sight lower than the skin, and the hair
thereof be turned white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it isa plague of leprosy
broken out of the boil.
21But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there beno white hairs therein, and ifit benot
lower than the skin, but besomewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:
22And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it
isa plague.
23But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it isa burning boil; and the priest
shall pronounce him clean.
24Or if there be anyflesh, in the skin whereof there isa hot burning, and the quick flesh
that burneth have a white bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white;
25Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, ifthe hair in the bright spot be turned
white, and it be insight deeper than the skin; it isa leprosy broken out of the burning:
wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it isthe plague of leprosy.
26But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there beno white hair in the bright spot, and it be
no lower than the other skin, but besomewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven
days:
27And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be spread much abroad in
the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it isthe plague of leprosy.
28And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the skin, but it besomewhat
dark; it isa rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it isan in-
flammation of the burning.
29If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;
30Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it bein sight deeper than the skin; and
there bein it a yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it isa dry scall,
even a leprosy upon the head or beard.
31And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, it benot in sight deeper than
the skin, and that there isno black hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the
plague of the scall seven days:
32And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague: and, behold, ifthe scall spread
not, and there be in it no yellow hair, and the scall benot in sight deeper than the skin;
33He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that
hath the scall seven days more:
34And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and, behold, ifthe scall be not
spread in the skin, nor bein sight deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him
clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
243Leviticus 13
35But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;
36Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be spread in the skin, the priest
shall not seek for yellow hair; he isunclean.
37But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is black hair grown up therein; the
scall is healed, he isclean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
38If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright
spots;
39Then the priest shall look: and, behold, ifthe bright spots in the skin of their flesh be
darkish white; it isa freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he isclean.
40And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he isbald; yet ishe clean.
41And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head toward his face, he isforehead
bald: yet ishe clean.
42And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reddish sore; it isa leprosy
sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead.
43Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, ifthe rising of the sore bewhite reddish
in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh;
44He is a leprous man, he isunclean: the priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his
plague isin his head.
45And the leper in whom the plague is,his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he
shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.
46All the days wherein the plague shall bein him he shall be defiled; he isunclean: he shall
dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be.
47The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it bea woollen garment, or
a linen garment;
48Whether it bein the warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any
thing made of skin;
49And if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp,
or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it isa plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto the
priest:
50And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up it that hath the plague seven days:
51And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment,
either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, orin any work that is made of skin; the plague
isa fretting leprosy; it isunclean.
52He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in woollen or in linen, or
any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for it isa fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the
fire.
53And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, either
in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin;
244Leviticus 13
54Then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein the plague is,and he
shall shut it up seven days more:
55And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is washed: and, behold, ifthe plague
have not changed his colour, and the plague be not spread; it isunclean; thou shalt burn it
in the fire; it isfret inward, whether it bebare within or without.
56And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague besomewhat dark after the washing of it;
then he shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the
woof:
57And if it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of
skin; it isa spreading plague: thou shalt burn that wherein the plague iswith fire.
58And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be,which thou shalt
wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and
shall be clean.
59This isthe law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or linen, either in the warp,
or woof, or any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.
245Leviticus 13
Chapter 14
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the
priest:
3And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, ifthe
plague of leprosy be healed in the leper;
4Then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive and
clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:
5And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel over
running water:
6As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop,
and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that waskilled over the running
water:
7And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and
shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose into the open field.
8And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash
himself in water, that he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall
tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.
9But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard
and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he
shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.
10And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb of
the first year without blemish, and three tenth deals of fine flour fora meat offering, mingled
with oil, and one log of oil.
11And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that is to be made clean, and
those things, before the Lord , atthe door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
12And the priest shall take one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log
of oil, and wave them fora wave offering before the Lord :
13And he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering and the burnt
offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering isthe priest’s, so isthe trespass offering: it
ismost holy:
14And the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall
put itupon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his
right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:
15And the priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour itinto the palm of his own left
hand:Leviticus 14
246Leviticus 14
16And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that isin his left hand, and shall sprinkle
of the oil with his finger seven times before the Lord :
17And of the rest of the oil that isin his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right
ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering:
18And the remnant of the oil that isin the priest’s hand he shall pour upon the head of him
that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord .
19And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an atonement for him that is to be
cleansed from his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering:
20And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.
21And if he bepoor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one lamb fora trespass of-
fering to be waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled
with oil for a meat offering, and a log of oil;
22And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be
a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering.
23And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the Lord .
24And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest
shall wave them fora wave offering before the Lord :
25And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take some of the
blood of the trespass offering, and put itupon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:
26And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand:
27And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that isin his left hand
seven times before the Lord :
28And the priest shall put of the oil that isin his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him
that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his
right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering:
29And the rest of the oil that isin the priest’s hand he shall put upon the head of him that
is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for him before the Lord .
30And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get;
31Even such as he is able to get, the one fora sin offering, and the other fora burnt offering,
with the meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed
before the Lord .
32This isthe law of him in whom isthe plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that
which pertaineth to his cleansing.
33And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
247Leviticus 14
34When ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put
the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;
35And he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there
isas it were a plague in the house:
36Then the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest go into itto
see the plague, that all that isin the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest
shall go in to see the house:
37And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, ifthe plague bein the walls of the house
with hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight arelower than the wall;
38Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house
seven days:
39And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, ifthe plague
be spread in the walls of the house;
40Then the priest shall command that they take away the stones in which the plague is,and
they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city:
41And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out
the dust that they scrape off without the city into an unclean place:
42And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shall
take other morter, and shall plaister the house.
43And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that he hath taken away
the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plaistered;
44Then the priest shall come and look, and, behold, ifthe plague be spread in the house, it
isa fretting leprosy in the house: it is unclean.
45And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the
morter of the house; and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
46Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until
the even.
47And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shall
wash his clothes.
48And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it,and, behold, the plague hath not spread
in the house, after the house was plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean,
because the plague is healed.
49And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:
50And he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water:
51And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and
dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house
seven times:
248Leviticus 14
52And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water,
and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet:
53But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement
for the house: and it shall be clean.
54This isthe law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
55And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house,
56And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot:
57To teach when it isunclean, and when it isclean: this isthe law of leprosy.
249Leviticus 14
Chapter 15
And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue
out of his flesh, because ofhis issue he isunclean.
3And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his
flesh be stopped from his issue, it ishis uncleanness.
4Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he
sitteth, shall be unclean.
5And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even.
6And he that sitteth on anything whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes,
and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
7And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
8And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and
bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
9And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall be unclean.
10And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean until the even:
and he that beareth any ofthose things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water,
and be unclean until the even.
11And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water,
he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
12And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue, shall be broken: and every
vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
13And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself
seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and
shall be clean.
14And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and
come before the Lord unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them
unto the priest:
15And the priest shall offer them, the one fora sin offering, and the other fora burnt offering;
and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord for his issue.
16And if any man’s seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in
water, and be unclean until the even.
17And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be washed
with water, and be unclean until the even.Leviticus 15
250Leviticus 15
18The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe
themselves in water, and be unclean until the even.
19And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put
apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.
20And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be unclean: every thing also
that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.
21And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and
be unclean until the even.
22And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
23And if it beon herbed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall
be unclean until the even.
24And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven
days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall beunclean.
25And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of her separation,
or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness
shall be as the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.
26Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her
separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her
separation.
27And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and
bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
28But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after
that she shall be clean.
29And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring
them unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
30And the priest shall offer the one fora sin offering, and the other fora burnt offering; and
the priest shall make an atonement for her before the Lord for the issue of her uncleanness.
31Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in
their uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle that isamong them.
32This isthe law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed goeth from him, and is
defiled therewith;
33And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.
251Leviticus 15
Chapter 16
And the Lord spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they
offered before the Lord , and died;
2And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times
into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which isupon the ark; that he die
not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.
3Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a
ram for a burnt offering.
4He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh,
and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are
holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and soput them on.
5And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a
sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.
6And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which isfor himself, and make an
atonement for himself, and for his house.
7And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the Lord atthe door of the taber-
nacle of the congregation.
8And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord , and the other lot for
the scapegoat.
9And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the Lord ’S lot fell, and offer him fora sin offer-
ing.
10But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the
Lord , to make an atonement with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.
11And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which isfor himself, and shall make
an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering
which isfor himself:
12And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord ,
and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring itwithin the vail:
13And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord , that the cloud of the incense
may cover the mercy seat that isupon the testimony, that he die not:
14And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle itwith his finger upon the
mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger
seven times.
15Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that isfor the people, and bring his blood
within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle
it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat:Leviticus 16
252Leviticus 16
16And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the
children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for
the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their unclean-
ness.
17And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make
an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself,
and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel.
18And he shall go out unto the altar that isbefore the Lord , and make an atonement for it;
and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put itupon the
horns of the altar round about.
19And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and
hallow it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.
20And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of
the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat:
21And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him
all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the
wilderness:
22And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he
shall let go the goat in the wilderness.
23And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen
garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there:
24And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and
come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make an
atonement for himself, and for the people.
25And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.
26And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in
water, and afterward come into the camp.
27And the bullock forthe sin offering, and the goat forthe sin offering, whose blood was
brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall onecarry forth without the camp; and
they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.
28And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward
he shall come into the camp.
29And thisshall be a statute for ever unto you: that in the seventh month, on the tenth
dayof the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, whether it beone of your
own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you:
30For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may
be clean from all your sins before the Lord .
253Leviticus 16
31It shall bea sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever.
32And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the
priest’s office in his father’s stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen
clothes, even the holy garments:
33And he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement
for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement
for the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.
34And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children
of Israel for all their sins once a year. And he did as the Lord commanded Moses.
254Leviticus 16
Chapter 17
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them;
This isthe thing which the Lord hath commanded, saying,
3What man soever there beof the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the
camp, or that killeth itout of the camp,
4And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering
unto the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord ; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he
hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people:
5To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the
open field, even that they may bring them unto the Lord , unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them forpeace offerings unto the Lord .
6And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord atthe door of the taber-
nacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the Lord .
7And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a
whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.
8And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there beof the house of Israel, or of
the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice,
9And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto
the Lord ; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.
10And whatsoever man there beof the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn
among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that
eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.
11For the life of the flesh isin the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make
an atonement for your souls: for it isthe blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.
12Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall
any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.
13And whatsoever man there beof the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn
among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even
pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.
14For it isthe life of all flesh; the blood of it isfor the life thereof: therefore I said unto the
children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh isthe
blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.
15And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that which was torn with beasts,
whether it beone of your own country, or a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and
bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.
16But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear his iniquity.Leviticus 17
255Leviticus 17
Chapter 18
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the Lord your God.
3After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings
of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their
ordinances.
4Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: I amthe Lord your
God.
5Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in
them: I amthe Lord .
6None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness:
I amthe Lord .
7The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she
is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
8The nakedness of thy father’s wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father’s nakedness.
9The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether
she beborn at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.
10The nakedness of thy son’s daughter, or of thy daughter’s daughter, even their nakedness
thou shalt not uncover: for theirs isthine own nakedness.
11The nakedness of thy father’s wife’s daughter, begotten of thy father, she isthy sister, thou
shalt not uncover her nakedness.
12Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s sister: she isthy father’s near kinswo-
man.
13Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister: for she isthy mother’s near
kinswoman.
14Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s brother, thou shalt not approach to
his wife: she isthine aunt.
15Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she isthy son’s wife; thou
shalt not uncover her nakedness.
16Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother’s wife: it isthy brother’s nakedness.
17Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou
take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness; forthey are
her near kinswomen: it iswickedness.
18Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, beside
the other in her life time.
19Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is
put apart for her uncleanness.Leviticus 18
256Leviticus 18
20Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour’s wife, to defile thyself with her.
21And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fireto Molech, neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy God: I amthe Lord .
22Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it isabomination.
23Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith: neither shall any woman
stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it isconfusion.
24Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which
I cast out before you:
25And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself
vomiteth out her inhabitants.
26Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit anyof these
abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you:
27(For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and
the land is defiled;)
28That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were
before you.
29For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls that commit them
shall be cut off from among their people.
30Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that yecommit not any oneof these abominable
customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am
the Lord your God.
257Leviticus 18
Chapter 19
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be
holy: for I the Lord your God amholy.
3Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my sabbaths: I amthe
Lord your God.
4Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I amthe Lord your God.
5And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord , ye shall offer it at your own
will.
6It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the
third day, it shall be burnt in the fire.
7And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it isabominable; it shall not be accepted.
8Therefore every onethat eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hal-
lowed thing of the Lord : and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
9And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of
thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.
10And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard;
thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I amthe Lord your God.
11Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.
12And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of
thy God: I amthe Lord .
13Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired
shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.
14Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt
fear thy God: I amthe Lord .
15Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the
poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy
neighbour.
16Thou shalt not go up and down asa talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou
stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I amthe Lord .
17Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy
neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.
18Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but
thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I amthe Lord .
19Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind:
thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen and
woollen come upon thee.Leviticus 19
258Leviticus 19
20And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that isa bondmaid, betrothed to an
husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her; she shall be scourged; they shall
not be put to death, because she was not free.
21And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord , unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation, even a ram for a trespass offering.
22And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before
the Lord for his sin which he hath done: and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven
him.
23And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for
food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncir-
cumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of.
24But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise the Lord withal.
25And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase
thereof: I amthe Lord your God.
26Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe
times.
27Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy
beard.
28Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you:
I amthe Lord .
29Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to
whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.
30Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I amthe Lord .
31Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by
them: I amthe Lord your God.
32Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and
fear thy God: I amthe Lord .
33And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him.
34Butthe stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and
thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I amthe Lord your
God.
35Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.
36Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I amthe Lord your
God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.
37Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I amthe
Lord .
259Leviticus 19
Chapter 20
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he beof the children of Israel,
or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his seed unto Molech; he shall
surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone him with stones.
3And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people; because
he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.
4And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of
his seed unto Molech, and kill him not:
5Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and
all that go a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with Molech, from among their people.
6And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a
whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among
his people.
7Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I amthe Lord your God.
8And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I amthe Lord which sanctify you.
9For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath
cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall beupon him.
10And the man that committeth adultery with another man’s wife, even hethat commit-
teth adultery with his neighbour’s wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put
to death.
11And the man that lieth with his father’s wife hath uncovered his father’s nakedness: both
of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall beupon them.
12And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they
have wrought confusion; their blood shall beupon them.
13If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed
an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall beupon them.
14And if a man take a wife and her mother, it iswickedness: they shall be burnt with fire,
both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.
15And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast.
16And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman,
and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall beupon them.
17And if a man shall take his sister, his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter, and see
her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it isa wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in
the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister’s nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.Leviticus 20
260Leviticus 20
18And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness;
he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and
both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
19And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister, nor of thy father’s sister:
for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.
20And if a man shall lie with his uncle’s wife, he hath uncovered his uncle’s nakedness: they
shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.
21And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it isan unclean thing: he hath uncovered his
brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.
22Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: that the
land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue you not out.
23And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast out before you: for they
committed all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
24But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess
it, a land that floweth with milk and honey: I amthe Lord your God, which have separated
you from other people.
25Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean
fowls and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by
any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you
as unclean.
26And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord amholy, and have severed you from other
people, that ye should be mine.
27A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be
put to death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall beupon them.
261Leviticus 20
Chapter 21
And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto
them, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people:
2But for his kin, that is near unto him, that is,for his mother, and for his father, and for his
son, and for his daughter, and for his brother,
3And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no husband; for her may
he be defiled.
4Buthe shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
5They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of
their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
6They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God: for the offerings
of the Lord made by fire, and the bread of their God, they do offer: therefore they shall be
holy.
7They shall not take a wife that isa whore, or profane; neither shall they take a woman put
away from her husband: for he isholy unto his God.
8Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God: he shall be holy
unto thee: for I the Lord , which sanctify you, amholy.
9And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth
her father: she shall be burnt with fire.
10And he that isthe high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was
poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend
his clothes;
11Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;
12Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the
crown of the anointing oil of his God isupon him: I amthe Lord .
13And he shall take a wife in her virginity.
14A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, oran harlot, these shall he not take: but he
shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.
15Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the Lord do sanctify him.
16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
17Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he beof thy seed in their generations that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
18For whatsoever man he bethat hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a
lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous,
19Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,
20Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or
hath his stones broken;Leviticus 21
262Leviticus 21
21No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the
offerings of the Lord made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the
bread of his God.
22He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy.
23Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a
blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the Lord do sanctify them.
24And Moses told itunto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel.
263Leviticus 21
Chapter 22
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of
the children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those things which they
hallow unto me: I amthe Lord .
3Say unto them, Whosoever he beof all your seed among your generations, that goeth unto
the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow unto the Lord , having his uncleanness
upon him, that soul shall be cut off from my presence: I amthe Lord .
4What man soever of the seed of Aaron isa leper, or hath a running issue; he shall not eat
of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any thing that isunclean bythe
dead, or a man whose seed goeth from him;
5Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man
of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath;
6The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the
holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.
7And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat of the holy things;
because it ishis food.
8That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself therewith:
I amthe Lord .
9They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they
profane it: I the Lord do sanctify them.
10There shall no stranger eat ofthe holy thing: a sojourner of the priest, or an hired servant,
shall not eat ofthe holy thing.
11But if the priest buy anysoul with his money, he shall eat of it, and he that is born in his
house: they shall eat of his meat.
12If the priest’s daughter also be married unto a stranger, she may not eat of an offering of
the holy things.
13But if the priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned
unto her father’s house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father’s meat: but there shall no
stranger eat thereof.
14And if a man eat ofthe holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part thereof
unto it, and shall give itunto the priest with the holy thing.
15And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they offer unto
the Lord ;
16Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for I the
Lord do sanctify them.
17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,Leviticus 22
264Leviticus 22
18Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them,
Whatsoever he beof the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his oblation
for all his vows, and for all his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the Lord for a
burnt offering;
19Ye shall offer at your own will a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of
the goats.
20But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for
you.
21And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord to accomplish his
vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall
be no blemish therein.
22Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer
these unto the Lord , nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the Lord .
23Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that
mayest thou offer fora freewill offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.
24Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither
shall ye make any offering thereof in your land.
25Neither from a stranger’s hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these; because
their corruption isin them, and blemishes bein them: they shall not be accepted for you.
26And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
27When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under
the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made
by fire unto the Lord .
28And whether it becow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day.
29And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord , offer itat your own will.
30On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I amthe
Lord .
31Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I amthe Lord .
32Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel:
I amthe Lord which hallow you,
33That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I amthe Lord .
265Leviticus 22
Chapter 23
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the Lord ,
which ye shall proclaim to beholy convocations, even these aremy feasts.
3Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day isthe sabbath of rest, an holy convocation;
ye shall do no work therein: it isthe sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.
4These arethe feasts of the Lord , even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in
their seasons.
5In the fourteenth dayof the first month at even isthe Lord ’S passover.
6And on the fifteenth day of the same month isthe feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord :
seven days ye must eat unleavened bread.
7In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
8But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven days: in the seventh day is
an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
10Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land
which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the
firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest:
11And he shall wave the sheaf before the Lord , to be accepted for you: on the morrow after
the sabbath the priest shall wave it.
12And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first
year for a burnt offering unto the Lord .
13And the meat offering thereof shall betwo tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an
offering made by fire unto the Lord fora sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall
beof wine, the fourth part of an hin.
14And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, until the selfsame day
that ye have brought an offering unto your God: it shall bea statute for ever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings.
15And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye
brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete:
16Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall
offer a new meat offering unto the Lord .
17Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals: they shall be of
fine flour; they shall be baken with leaven; they arethe firstfruits unto the Lord .
18And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one
young bullock, and two rams: they shall be fora burnt offering unto the Lord , with theirLeviticus 23
266Leviticus 23
meat offering, and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto
the Lord .
19Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first
year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.
20And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits fora wave offering before
the Lord , with the two lambs: they shall be holy to the Lord for the priest.
21And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy convocation unto you:
ye shall do no servile work therein: it shall bea statute for ever in all your dwellings
throughout your generations.
22And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the
corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest:
thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I amthe Lord your God.
23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
24Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of the
month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation.
25Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
Lord .
26And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
27Also on the tenth dayof this seventh month there shall bea day of atonement: it shall be
an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by
fire unto the Lord .
28And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it isa day of atonement, to make an atone-
ment for you before the Lord your God.
29For whatsoever soul it bethat shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off
from among his people.
30And whatsoever soul it bethat doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy
from among his people.
31Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall bea statute for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.
32It shall beunto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth dayof the
month at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.
33And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
34Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be
the feast of tabernacles forseven days unto the Lord .
35On the first day shall bean holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
36Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord : on the eighth day shall
be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord :
it isa solemn assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.
267Leviticus 23
37These arethe feasts of the Lord , which ye shall proclaim to beholy convocations, to offer
an offering made by fire unto the Lord , a burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice,
and drink offerings, every thing upon his day:
38Beside the sabbaths of the Lord , and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside
all your freewill offerings, which ye give unto the Lord .
39Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the
land, ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days: on the first day shall bea sabbath, and
on the eighth day shall bea sabbath.
40And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees,
and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord
your God seven days.
41And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the year. It shall bea statute for
ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.
42Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths:
43That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths,
when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I amthe Lord your God.
44And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the Lord .
268Leviticus 23
Chapter 24
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.
3Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the congregation, shall Aaron order
it from the evening unto the morning before the Lord continually: it shall bea statute for
ever in your generations.
4He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the Lord continually.
5And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be
in one cake.
6And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the Lord .
7And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a
memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord .
8Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the
children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.
9And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’; and they shall eat it in the holy place: for it ismost
holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.
10And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among
the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together
in the camp;
11And the Israelitish woman’s son blasphemed the name of the Lord ,and cursed. And they
brought him unto Moses: (and his mother’s name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of
the tribe of Dan:)
12And they put him in ward, that the mind of the Lord might be shewed them.
13And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
14Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their
hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
15And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God shall
bear his sin.
16And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord , he shall surely be put to death, and all the
congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land,
when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord ,shall be put to death.
17And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.
18And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.
19And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him;
20Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so
shall it be done to him again.Leviticus 24
269Leviticus 24
21And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to
death.
22Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country:
for I amthe Lord your God.
23And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had
cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the
Lord commanded Moses.
270Leviticus 24
Chapter 25
And the Lord spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land which
I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the Lord .
3Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather
in the fruit thereof;
4But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the Lord : thou
shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.
5That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather
the grapes of thy vine undressed: forit is a year of rest unto the land.
6And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy
maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee,
7And for thy cattle, and for the beast that arein thy land, shall all the increase thereof be
meat.
8And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years;
and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.
9Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth dayof the seventh
month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.
10And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout allthe land unto all
the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his
possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.
11A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which
groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed.
12For it isthe jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the
field.
13In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession.
14And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy neighbour’s hand, ye
shall not oppress one another:
15According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and
according unto the number of years of the fruits he shall sell unto thee:
16According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according
to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number of
the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.
17Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I amthe Lord
your God.
18Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall
dwell in the land in safety.Leviticus 25
271Leviticus 25
19And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety.
20And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor
gather in our increase:
21Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit
for three years.
22And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yetof old fruit until the ninth year; until her
fruits come in ye shall eat ofthe old store.
23The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land ismine; for ye arestrangers and so-
journers with me.
24And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.
25If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any
of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.
26And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;
27Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man
to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession.
28But if he be not able to restore itto him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand
of him that hath bought it until the year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he
shall return unto his possession.
29And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole
year after it is sold; within a full year may he redeem it.
30And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that isin the
walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations: it
shall not go out in the jubile.
31But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be counted as
the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.
32Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the cities of their possession,
may the Levites redeem at any time.
33And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his
possession, shall go out in the year ofjubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are
their possession among the children of Israel.
34But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it is their perpetual posses-
sion.
35And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve
him: yea, though he bea stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.
36Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with
thee.
37Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.
272Leviticus 25
38I amthe Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you
the land of Canaan, and to be your God.
39And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou
shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
40Butas an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto
the year of jubile:
41And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and shall return
unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.
42For they aremy servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not
be sold as bondmen.
43Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God.
44Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shall beof the heathen
that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
45Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye
buy, and of their families that arewith you, which they begat in your land: and they shall
be your possession.
46And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for
a possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of
Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.
47And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth by him
wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger orsojourner by thee, or to the stock of the
stranger’s family:
48After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him:
49Either his uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem him, or anythat is nigh of kin unto him
of his family may redeem him; or if he be able, he may redeem himself.
50And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto
the year of jubile: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years, ac-
cording to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.
51If there beyet many years behind, according unto them he shall give again the price of his
redemption out of the money that he was bought for.
52And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he shall count with him,
and according unto his years shall he give him again the price of his redemption.
53And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the other shall not rule with rigour
over him in thy sight.
54And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out in the year of jubile, both
he, and his children with him.
55For unto me the children of Israel areservants; they aremy servants whom I brought
forth out of the land of Egypt: I amthe Lord your God.
273Leviticus 25
Chapter 26
Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image,
neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I amthe
Lord your God.
2Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I amthe Lord .
3If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
4Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees
of the field shall yield their fruit.
5And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the
sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.
6And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid:
and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.
7And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
8And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to
flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.
9For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish
my covenant with you.
10And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new.
11And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you.
12And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people.
13I amthe Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should
not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.
14But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments;
15And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not
do all my commandments, butthat ye break my covenant:
16I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the
burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your
seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
17And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that
hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.
18And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more
for your sins.
19And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your
earth as brass:
20And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither
shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.Leviticus 26
274Leviticus 26
21And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven
times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
22I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy
your cattle, and make you few in number; and your high ways shall be desolate.
23And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;
24Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.
25And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of mycovenant: and
when ye are gathered together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and
ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
26And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one
oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be
satisfied.
27And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me;
28Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times
for your sins.
29And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.
30And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases
upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.
31And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will
not smell the savour of your sweet odours.
32And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which dwell therein shall be
astonished at it.
33And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your
land shall be desolate, and your cities waste.
34Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your en-
emies’ land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.
35As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye
dwelt upon it.
36And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the
lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee,
as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.
37And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and
ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.
38And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.
39And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and
also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.
40If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass
which they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me;
275Leviticus 26
41And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity:
42Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also
my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.
43The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate
without them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because
they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.
44And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away,
neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for
I amthe Lord their God.
45But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth
out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I amthe Lord .
46These arethe statutes and judgments and laws, which the Lord made between him and
the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.
276Leviticus 26
Chapter 27
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular
vow, the persons shall befor the Lord by thy estimation.
3And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old,
even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
4And if it bea female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.
5And if it befrom five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of
the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
6And if it befrom a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the
male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall bethree shekels of silver.
7And if it befrom sixty years old and above; if it bea male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen
shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
8But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and
the priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.
9And if it bea beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord , all that any man giveth
of such unto the Lord shall be holy.
10He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at
all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.
11And if it beany unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the Lord , then
he shall present the beast before the priest:
12And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who artthe
priest, so shall it be.
13But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation.
14And when a man shall sanctify his house to beholy unto the Lord , then the priest shall
estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.
15And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the
money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be his.
16And if a man shall sanctify unto the Lord some part of a field of his possession, then thy
estimation shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at
fifty shekels of silver.
17If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand.
18But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money
according to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated
from thy estimation.
19And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth
part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be assured to him.Leviticus 27
277Leviticus 27
20And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not
be redeemed any more.
21But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy unto the Lord , as a field devoted;
the possession thereof shall be the priest’s.
22And if a man sanctify unto the Lord a field which he hath bought, which isnot of the
fields of his possession;
23Then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto the year of
the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that day, asa holy thing unto the Lord .
24In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, even to
him to whom the possession of the land did belong.
25And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs
shall be the shekel.
26Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the Lord ’S firstling, no man shall
sanctify it; whether it beox, or sheep: it isthe Lord ’S.
27And if it beof an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it according to thine estimation, and
shall add a fifth part of it thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to
thy estimation.
28Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord of all that he
hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed:
every devoted thing ismost holy unto the Lord .
29None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; butshall surely be put
to death.
30And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, orof the fruit of the tree, is
the Lord ’S: it isholy unto the Lord .
31And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part
thereof.
32And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passeth under
the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord .
33He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change
it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.
34These arethe commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the children of Israel
in mount Sinai.
278Leviticus 27
The Fourth Book of Moses, called
NumbersNumbers
279Number s
Chapter 1
And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, on the first dayof the second month, in the second year after they were come
out of the land of Egypt, saying,
2Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the
house of their fathers, with the number of their names, every male by their polls;
3From twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and
Aaron shall number them by their armies.
4And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers.
5And these arethe names of the men that shall stand with you: of the tribe ofReuben;
Elizur the son of Shedeur.
6Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
7Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
8Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
9Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.
10Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Ammihud: of Manasseh;
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
11Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.
12Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
13Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.
14Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
15Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.
16These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads
of thousands in Israel.
17And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their names:
18And they assembled all the congregation together on the first dayof the second month,
and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according
to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
19As the Lord commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
20And the children of Reuben, Israel’s eldest son, by their generations, after their families,
by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every
male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
21Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand
and five hundred.
22Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, those that were numbered of them, according to the number of the names, byNumbers 1
280Number s 1
their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
war;
23Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine
thousand and three hundred.
24Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
were able to go forth to war;
25Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand
six hundred and fifty.
26Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war;
27Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and fourteen
thousand and six hundred.
28Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war;
29Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty and four
thousand and four hundred.
30Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war;
31Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven
thousand and four hundred.
32Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by their generations,
after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names,
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
33Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and
five hundred.
34Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their families, by the house
of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;
35Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty and two
thousand and two hundred.
36Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their families, by the house
of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;
281Number s 1
37Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five
thousand and four hundred.
38Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
were able to go forth to war;
39Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan, were threescore and two
thousand and seven hundred.
40Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war;
41Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one thousand
and five hundred.
42Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after their families, by the
house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and
upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
43Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three
thousand and four hundred.
44These arethose that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes
of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers.
45So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers,
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel;
46Even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and
five hundred and fifty.
47But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.
48For the Lord had spoken unto Moses, saying,
49Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of Israel:
50But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels
thereof, and over all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels
thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
51And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down: and when the
tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall
be put to death.
52And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every
man by his own standard, throughout their hosts.
53But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath
upon the congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.
282Number s 1
54And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did
they.
283Number s 1
Chapter 2
And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
2Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their
father’s house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.
3And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of
Judah pitch throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall becaptain
of the children of Judah.
4And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and fourteen thousand
and six hundred.
5And those that do pitch next unto him shall bethe tribe of Issachar: and Nethaneel the son
of Zuar shall becaptain of the children of Issachar.
6And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and four thousand and four
hundred.
7Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall becaptain of the children of
Zebulun.
8And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven thousand and
four hundred.
9All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred thousand and fourscore
thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies. These shall first set
forth.
10On the south side shall bethe standard of the camp of Reuben according to their
armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben shall beElizur the son of Shedeur.
11And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six thousand and five
hundred.
12And those which pitch by him shall bethe tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children
of Simeon shall beShelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
13And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine thousand and
three hundred.
14Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall beEliasaph the son of Reuel.
15And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five thousand and
six hundred and fifty.
16All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred thousand and fifty and
one thousand and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies. And they shall set forth
in the second rank.
17Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites
in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place
by their standards.Numbers 2
284Number s 2
18On the west side shall bethe standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their
armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim shall beElishama the son of Ammihud.
19And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred.
20And by him shall bethe tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the children of Manasseh
shall beGamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
21And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two thousand and
two hundred.
22Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin shall beAbidan the
son of Gideoni.
23And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five thousand and
four hundred.
24All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred thousand and eight
thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shall go forward in the third
rank.
25The standard of the camp of Dan shall beon the north side by their armies: and the
captain of the children of Dan shall beAhiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
26And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two thousand
and seven hundred.
27And those that encamp by him shall bethe tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children
of Asher shall bePagiel the son of Ocran.
28And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one thousand and
five hundred.
29Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of Naphtali shall beAhira
the son of Enan.
30And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and three thousand and
four hundred.
31All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred thousand and fifty and
seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go hindmost with their standards.
32These arethose which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their
fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts were six hundred
thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
33But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded
Moses.
34And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses: so they
pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families, according
to the house of their fathers.
285Number s 2
Chapter 3
These also arethe generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the Lord spake with
Moses in mount Sinai.
2And these arethe names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar,
and Ithamar.
3These arethe names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he con-
secrated to minister in the priest’s office.
4And Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord , when they offered strange fire before the Lord ,
in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered
in the priest’s office in the sight of Aaron their father.
5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
6Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may min-
ister unto him.
7And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the taber-
nacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.
8And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge
of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
9And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they arewholly given unto him
out of the children of Israel.
10And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their priest’s office:
and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
12And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all
the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites
shall be mine;
13Because all the firstborn aremine; foron the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land
of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine shall they
be: I amthe Lord .
14And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
15Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by their families: every male
from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.
16And Moses numbered them according to the word of the Lord , as he was commanded.
17And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
18And these arethe names of the sons of Gershon by their families; Libni, and Shimei.
19And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
20And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These arethe families of the
Levites according to the house of their fathers.Numbers 3
286Number s 3
21Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these arethe
families of the Gershonites.
22Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a
month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and
five hundred.
23The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.
24And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall beEliasaph the son of
Lael.
25And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation shall bethe
tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation,
26And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which isby the
tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.
27And of Kohath wasthe family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and
the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these arethe families of the
Kohathites.
28In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were eight thousand and
six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
29The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward.
30And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites shall beElizaphan
the son of Uzziel.
31And their charge shall bethe ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and
the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service
thereof.
32And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall bechief over the chief of the Levites, and
have the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary.
33Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these are
the families of Merari.
34And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from
a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred.
35And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of
Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward.
36And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall bethe boards of the taber-
nacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels
thereof, and all that serveth thereto,
37And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.
38But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle
of the congregation eastward, shall beMoses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge
287Number s 3
of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.
39All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the com-
mandment of the Lord , throughout their families, all the males from a month old and upward,
were twenty and two thousand.
40And the Lord said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males of the children
of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
41And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I amthe Lord ) instead of all the firstborn among
the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the
cattle of the children of Israel.
42And Moses numbered, as the Lord commanded him, all the firstborn among the children
of Israel.
43And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of
those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and
threescore and thirteen.
44And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
45Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of
the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I amthe Lord .
46And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen of
the firstborn of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites;
47Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel istwenty gerahs:)
48And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto Aaron and to his sons.
49And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and above them that were
redeemed by the Levites:
50Of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred
and threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
51And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons, ac-
cording to the word of the Lord , as the Lord commanded Moses.
288Number s 3
Chapter 4
And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
2Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by
the house of their fathers,
3From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to
do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
4This shall bethe service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, about
the most holy things:
5And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall
take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it:
6And shall put thereon the covering of badgers’ skins, and shall spread over ita cloth wholly
of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.
7And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the
dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers to cover withal: and the continual bread
shall be thereon:
8And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of
badgers’ skins, and shall put in the staves thereof.
9And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and his lamps,
and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister
unto it:
10And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of badgers’ skins, and
shall put itupon a bar.
11And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering
of badgers’ skins, and shall put to the staves thereof:
12And they shall take all the instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanc-
tuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers’ skins, and
shall put them on a bar:
13And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon:
14And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, even
the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all the vessels of the altar; and
they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.
15And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the
vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall
come to bear it:but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things arethe
burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation.Numbers 4
289Number s 4
16And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest pertaineth the oil for the light,
and the sweet incense, and the daily meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight
of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein is,in the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof.
17And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
18Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites:
19But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most
holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and
to his burden:
20But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die.
21And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
22Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their
families;
23From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them; all that
enter in to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
24This isthe service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for burdens:
25And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation,
his covering, and the covering of the badgers’ skins that isabove upon it, and the hanging
for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
26And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which
isby the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments
of their service, and all that is made for them: so shall they serve.
27At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gers-
honites, in all their burdens, and in all their service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge
all their burdens.
28This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congreg-
ation: and their charge shall beunder the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
29As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their families, by the house
of their fathers;
30From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every
one that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation.
31And this isthe charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tabernacle of
the congregation; the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof,
and sockets thereof,
32And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords,
with all their instruments, and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the instru-
ments of the charge of their burden.
33This isthe service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in
the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
290Number s 4
34And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of the
Kohathites after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
35From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into
the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation:
36And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred
and fifty.
37These were they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all that might do
service in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according
to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
38And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by
the house of their fathers,
39From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into
the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
40Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by the house of their
fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
41These arethey that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that might
do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number ac-
cording to the commandment of the Lord .
42And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their
families, by the house of their fathers,
43From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into
the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
44Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were three thousand and two
hundred.
45These bethose that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses
and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
46All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the chief of Israel
numbered, after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
47From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the
service of the ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation,
48Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and
fourscore.
49According to the commandment of the Lord they were numbered by the hand of Moses,
every one according to his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered
of him, as the Lord commanded Moses.
291Number s 4
Chapter 5
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one
that hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead:
3Both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they defile
not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.
4And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp: as the Lord spake
unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.
5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
6Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men
commit, to do a trespass against the Lord , and that person be guilty;
7Then they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his trespass
with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give itunto him against
whom he hath trespassed.
8But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recom-
pensed unto the Lord , even to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an
atonement shall be made for him.
9And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto
the priest, shall be his.
10And every man’s hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it
shall be his.
11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
12Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man’s wife go aside, and
commit a trespass against him,
13And a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept
close, and she be defiled, and there beno witness against her, neither she be taken with the
manner;
14And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled:
or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled:
15Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her,
the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense
thereon; for it isan offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remem-
brance.
16And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the Lord :
17And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor
of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put itinto the water:Numbers 5
292Number s 5
18And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord , and uncover the woman’s head, and
put the offering of memorial in her hands, which isthe jealousy offering: and the priest shall
have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse:
19And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If no man have lain
with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness with another instead of thy husband,
be thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse:
20But if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and
some man have lain with thee beside thine husband:
21Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say
unto the woman, The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the Lord
doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell;
22And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thybelly to swell,
and thythigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, amen.
23And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out with the bitter
water:
24And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the
water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter.
25Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman’s hand, and shall wave
the offering before the Lord , and offer it upon the altar:
26And the priest shall take an handful of the offering, even the memorial thereof, and burn
itupon the altar, and afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.
27And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that, if she be
defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse
shall enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and
the woman shall be a curse among her people.
28And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be free, and shall conceive
seed.
29This isthe law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband,
and is defiled;
30Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall
set the woman before the Lord , and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
31Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.
293Number s 5
Chapter 6
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall
separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the Lord :
3He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine,
or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes,
or dried.
4All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, from the
kernels even to the husk.
5All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come upon his head: until the
days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth himself unto the Lord , he shall be holy, and shall
let the locks of the hair of his head grow.
6All the days that he separateth himself unto the Lord he shall come at no dead body.
7He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for
his sister, when they die: because the consecration of his God isupon his head.
8All the days of his separation he isholy unto the Lord .
9And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration;
then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.
10And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
11And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and
make an atonement for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head that
same day.
12And he shall consecrate unto the Lord the days of his separation, and shall bring a lamb
of the first year for a trespass offering: but the days that were before shall be lost, because
his separation was defiled.
13And this isthe law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation are fulfilled: he
shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
14And he shall offer his offering unto the Lord , one he lamb of the first year without blemish
for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin offering,
and one ram without blemish for peace offerings,
15And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of un-
leavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings.
16And the priest shall bring them before the Lord , and shall offer his sin offering, and his
burnt offering:
17And he shall offer the ram fora sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord , with the basket
of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering, and his drink offering.Numbers 6
294Number s 6
18And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation atthe door of the tabernacle of
the congregation, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and put itin the fire
which isunder the sacrifice of the peace offerings.
19And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of
the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazarite,
after the hair ofhis separation is shaven:
20And the priest shall wave them fora wave offering before the Lord : this isholy for the
priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.
21This isthe law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and ofhis offering unto the Lord for his
separation, beside that that his hand shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he
must do after the law of his separation.
22And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
23Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of
Israel, saying unto them,
24The Lord bless thee, and keep thee:
25The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:
26The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.
27And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them.
295Number s 6
Chapter 7
And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle, and had
anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels
thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them;
2That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of the
tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered:
3And they brought their offering before the Lord , six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a
wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the
tabernacle.
4And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
5Take itof them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.
6And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.
7Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service:
8And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their
service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
9But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the sanctuary belonging
unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders.
10And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed,
even the princes offered their offering before the altar.
11And the Lord said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering, each prince on his day, for
the dedicating of the altar.
12And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of
the tribe of Judah:
13And his offering was one silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty
shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
14One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense:
15One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
16One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
17And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
18On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer:
19He offered forhis offering one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and
thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of
them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
20One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full of incense:Numbers 7
296Number s 7
21One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
22One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
23And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
24On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, did offer:
25His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
26One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
27One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
28One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
29And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.
30On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, did
offer:
31His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
32One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
33One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
34One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
35And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
36On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon,
did offer:
37His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
38One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
39One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
40One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
41And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
42On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, offered:
43His offering wasone silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour
mingled with oil for a meat offering:
44One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
297Number s 7
45One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
46One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
47And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
48On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim,
offered:
49His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
50One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
51One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
52One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
53And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
54On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of
Manasseh:
55His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
56One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
57One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
58One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
59And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
60On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin,
offered:
61His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
62One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
63One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
64One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
65And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
66On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan,
offered:
298Number s 7
67His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
68One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
69One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
70One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
71And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
72On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, offered:
73His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
74One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
75One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
76One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
77And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.
78On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, offered:
79His offering wasone silver charger, the weight whereof wasan hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
80One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
81One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
82One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
83And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the
first year: this was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
84This wasthe dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel:
twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:
85Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the
silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctu-
ary:
86The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel
of the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty shekels.
87All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the
first year twelve, with their meat offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.
88And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were twenty and four bullocks, the
rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This wasthe dedication of the
altar, after that it was anointed.
299Number s 7
89And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him,
then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon
the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.
300Number s 7
Chapter 8
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall
give light over against the candlestick.
3And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the Lord
commanded Moses.
4And this work of the candlestick was ofbeaten gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers
thereof, was beaten work: according unto the pattern which the Lord had shewed Moses,
so he made the candlestick.
5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
6Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.
7And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them,
and let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and somake themselves
clean.
8Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even fine flour mingled with
oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.
9And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt
gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together:
10And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord : and the children of Israel shall put their
hands upon the Levites:
11And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord foran offering of the children of Israel,
that they may execute the service of the Lord .
12And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer
the one fora sin offering, and the other fora burnt offering, unto the Lord , to make an
atonement for the Levites.
13And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them foran
offering unto the Lord .
14Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites
shall be mine.
15And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:
and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them foran offering.
16For they arewholly given unto me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as
open every womb, even instead ofthe firstborn of all the children of Israel, have I taken them
unto me.
17For all the firstborn of the children of Israel aremine, both man and beast: on the day that
I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
18And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of Israel.Numbers 8
301Number s 8
19And I have given the Levites asa gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children
of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and
to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children
of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.
20And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel, did to the Levites
according unto all that the Lord commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did the
children of Israel unto them.
21And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them as
an offering before the Lord ; and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them.
22And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation
before Aaron, and before his sons: as the Lord had commanded Moses concerning the
Levites, so did they unto them.
23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
24This is itthat belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they
shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:
25And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof, and shall
serve no more:
26But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the
charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.
302Number s 8
Chapter 9
And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the
second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,
2Let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his appointed season.
3In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: ac-
cording to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.
4And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the passover.
5And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at even in the wilderness
of Sinai: according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.
6And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they
could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on
that day:
7And those men said unto him, We aredefiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are
we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the Lord in his appointed season among
the children of Israel?
8And Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will command con-
cerning you.
9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
10Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity shall be
unclean by reason of a dead body, or bein a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover
unto the Lord .
11The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it, and eat it with un-
leavened bread and bitter herbs.
12They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone of it: according to all
the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it.
13But the man that isclean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover,
even the same soul shall be cut off from among his people: because he brought not the offering
of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.
14And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover unto the Lord ; ac-
cording to the ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner thereof, so shall he
do: ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land.
15And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle,
namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the
appearance of fire, until the morning.
16So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.Numbers 9
303Number s 9
17And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel
journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their
tents.
18At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed, and at the command-
ment of the Lord they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested
in their tents.
19And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel
kept the charge of the Lord , and journeyed not.
20And soit was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; according to the com-
mandment of the Lord they abode in their tents, and according to the commandment of
the Lord they journeyed.
21And soit was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was
taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the
cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
22Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the taber-
nacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but
when it was taken up, they journeyed.
23At the commandment of the Lord they rested in the tents, and at the commandment of
the Lord they journeyed: they kept the charge of the Lord , at the commandment of the Lord
by the hand of Moses.
304Number s 9
Chapter 10
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest
use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps.
3And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to thee at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
4And if they blow butwith one trumpet, then the princes, which areheads of the thousands
of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.
5When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts shall go forward.
6When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the south side shall
take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
7But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound
an alarm.
8And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you
for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations.
9And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow
an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and ye
shall be saved from your enemies.
10Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your
months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices
of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I amthe
Lord your God.
11And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in the second year,
that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.
12And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud
rested in the wilderness of Paran.
13And they first took their journey according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand
of Moses.
14In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah according to
their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
15And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
16And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.
17And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set
forward, bearing the tabernacle.
18And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies: and
over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.Numbers 10
305Number s 10
19And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishad-
dai.
20And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
21And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the other did set up the taber-
nacle against they came.
22And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to
their armies: and over his host was Elishama the son of Ammihud.
23And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Ped-
ahzur.
24And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin wasAbidan the son of Gideoni.
25And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the
rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and over his host was Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai.
26And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ocran.
27And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.
28Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to their armies, when they
set forward.
29And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses’ father in law,
We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said, I will give it you: come thou with
us, and we will do thee good: for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.
30And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.
31And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp
in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.
32And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do
unto us, the same will we do unto thee.
33And they departed from the mount of the Lord three days’ journey: and the ark of
the covenant of the Lord went before them in the three days’ journey, to search out a resting
place for them.
34And the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out of the camp.
35And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Lord , and let
thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee.
36And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord , unto the many thousands of Israel.
306Number s 10
Chapter 11
And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord : and the Lord heard it;and his
anger was kindled; and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that
were in the uttermost parts of the camp.
2And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the Lord , the fire was
quenched.
3And he called the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of the Lord burnt among
them.
4And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of Israel
also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
5We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons,
and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
6But now our soul isdried away: there isnothing at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.
7And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdellium.
8And the people went about, and gathered it,and ground itin mills, or beat itin a mortar,
and baked itin pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
9And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.
10Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every man in the door
of his tent: and the anger of the Lord was kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.
11And Moses said unto the Lord , Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore
have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
12Have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me,
Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which
thou swarest unto their fathers?
13Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep unto me, saying,
Give us flesh, that we may eat.
14I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it istoo heavy for me.
15And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in
thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness.
16And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel,
whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them
unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee.
17And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which isupon
thee, and will put itupon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that
thou bear it not thyself alone.Numbers 11
307Number s 11
18And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow, and ye shall eat
flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the Lord , saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it
was well with us in Egypt: therefore the Lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.
19Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;
20Buteven a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you:
because that ye have despised the Lord which isamong you, and have wept before him,
saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?
21And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, aresix hundred thousand footmen; and
thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.
22Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the
sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
23And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lord ’s hand waxed short? thou shalt see now
whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.
24And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the Lord , and gathered the
seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.
25And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was
upon him, and gave itunto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease.
26But there remained two of themen in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the
name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were
written, but went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.
27And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in
the camp.
28And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, oneof his young men, answered and
said, My lord Moses, forbid them.
29And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord ’S people
were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!
30And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
31And there went forth a wind from the Lord , and brought quails from the sea, and let
them fall by the camp, as it were a day’s journey on this side, and as it were a day’s journey
on the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the face of the
earth.
32And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, and they
gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread them all
abroad for themselves round about the camp.
33And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord
was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague.
308Number s 11
34And he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah: because there they buried the
people that lusted.
35And the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth; and abode at Hazeroth.
309Number s 11
Chapter 12
And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom
he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.
2And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by
us? And the Lord heard it.
3(Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the
earth.)
4And the Lord spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out
ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.
5And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle,
and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth.
6And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, Ithe Lord will make
myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.
7My servant Moses isnot so, who isfaithful in all mine house.
8With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the
similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against
my servant Moses?
9And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them; and he departed.
10And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous,
white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.
11And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein
we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.
12Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of
his mother’s womb.
13And Moses cried unto the Lord , saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee.
14And the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not
be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her
be received in again.
15And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people journeyed not till
Miriam was brought in again.
16And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.Numbers 12
310Number s 12
Chapter 13
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children
of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them.
3And Moses by the commandment of the Lord sent them from the wilderness of Paran: all
those men were heads of the children of Israel.
4And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.
5Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.
6Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
7Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.
8Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.
9Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
10Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
11Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
12Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
13Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.
14Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
15Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
16These arethe names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called
Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.
17And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them, Get you up
this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
18And see the land, what it is;and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they bestrong
or weak, few or many;
19And what the land isthat they dwell in, whether it begood or bad; and what cities they be
that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong holds;
20And what the land is,whether it befat or lean, whether there be wood therein, or not.
And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of
the firstripe grapes.
21So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, as
men come to Hamath.
22And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman, Sheshai, and
Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in
Egypt.)
23And they came unto the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they brought of the
pomegranates, and of the figs.Numbers 13
311Number s 13
24The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes which the children
of Israel cut down from thence.
25And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.
26And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the
children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto
them, and unto all the congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.
27And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely
it floweth with milk and honey; and this isthe fruit of it.
28Nevertheless the people bestrong that dwell in the land, and the cities arewalled, and
very great: and moreover we saw the children of Anak there.
29The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the
Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of
Jordan.
30And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it;
for we are well able to overcome it.
31But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up against the people; for
they are stronger than we.
32And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children
of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up
the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it aremen of a great stature.
33And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in
our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.
312Number s 13
Chapter 14
And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.
2And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole
congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would
God we had died in this wilderness!
3And wherefore hath the Lord brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives
and our children should be a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
4And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.
5Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of
the children of Israel.
6And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of them that
searched the land, rent their clothes:
7And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we
passed through to search it, isan exceeding good land.
8If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which
floweth with milk and honey.
9Only rebel not ye against the Lord , neither fear ye the people of the land; for they arebread
for us: their defence is departed from them, and the Lord iswith us: fear them not.
10But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of the Lord appeared
in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the children of Israel.
11And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? and how long
will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shewed among them?
12I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
nation and mightier than they.
13And Moses said unto the Lord , Then the Egyptians shall hear it,(for thou broughtest
up this people in thy might from among them;)
14And they will tell itto the inhabitants of this land: forthey have heard that thou Lord art
among this people, that thou Lord art seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over
them, and that thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of
fire by night.
15Now ifthou shalt kill allthis people as one man, then the nations which have heard
the fame of thee will speak, saying,
16Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto
them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.
17And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken,
saying,Numbers 14
313Number s 14
18The Lord islongsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and
by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation.
19Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of thy
mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.
20And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word:
21But astruly asI live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord .
22Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt
and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened
to my voice;
23Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of
them that provoked me see it:
24But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it.
25(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) To morrow turn you, and
get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.
26And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
27How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard
the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.
28Say unto them, As truly asI live, saith the Lord , as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I
do to you:
29Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against
me,
30Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I sware to make you dwell
therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
31But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall
know the land which ye have despised.
32But as foryou, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness.
33And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms,
until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness.
34After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days, each day for
a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my breach of
promise.
35I the Lord have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered
together against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.
36And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made all the con-
gregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land,
314Number s 14
37Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before
the Lord .
38But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of the men that
went to search the land, lived still.
39And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel: and the people mourned
greatly.
40And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain,
saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place which the Lord hath promised: for we
have sinned.
41And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the Lord ? but it
shall not prosper.
42Go not up, for the Lord isnot among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies.
43For the Amalekites and the Canaanites arethere before you, and ye shall fall by the sword:
because ye are turned away from the Lord , therefore the Lord will not be with you.
44But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the
Lord , and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
45Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote
them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.
315Number s 14
Chapter 15
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of
your habitations, which I give unto you,
3And will make an offering by fire unto the Lord , a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in performing
a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a sweet savour unto the
Lord , of the herd, or of the flock:
4Then shall he that offereth his offering unto the Lord bring a meat offering of a tenth deal
of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of oil.
5And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt thou prepare with the burnt
offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.
6Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare fora meat offering two tenth deals of flour mingled with
the third part of an hin of oil.
7And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an hin of wine, fora sweet savour
unto the Lord .
8And when thou preparest a bullock fora burnt offering, or fora sacrifice in performing a
vow, or peace offerings unto the Lord :
9Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth deals of flour mingled
with half an hin of oil.
10And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, for an offering made by fire,
of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
11Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid.
12According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to
their number.
13All that are born of the country shall do these things after this manner, in offering an of-
fering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord .
14And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever beamong you in your generations, and
will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord ; as ye do, so he shall do.
15One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that
sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye are,so shall the stranger
be before the Lord .
16One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.
17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
18Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land
whither I bring you,
19Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering
unto the Lord .Numbers 15
316Number s 15
20Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough foran heave offering: as ye dothe heave
offering of the threshingfloor, so shall ye heave it.
21Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the Lord an heave offering in your generations.
22And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments, which the Lord hath
spoken unto Moses,
23Even allthat the Lord hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the
Lord commanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations;
24Then it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge of the con-
gregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a
sweet savour unto the Lord , with his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the
manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.
25And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel,
and it shall be forgiven them; for it is ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice
made by fire unto the Lord , and their sin offering before the Lord , for their ignorance:
26And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that
sojourneth among them; seeing all the people were in ignorance.
27And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she goat of the first year
for a sin offering.
28And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he
sinneth by ignorance before the Lord , to make an atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven
him.
29Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance, both forhim that is born
among the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them.
30But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he beborn in the land, or a
stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord ; and that soul shall be cut off from among his
people.
31Because he hath despised the word of the Lord , and hath broken his commandment, that
soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall beupon him.
32And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered
sticks upon the sabbath day.
33And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto
all the congregation.
34And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him.
35And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death: all the congregation
shall stone him with stones without the camp.
36And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones,
and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses.
37And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
317Number s 15
38Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders
of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the
borders a ribband of blue:
39And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the
commandments of the Lord , and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and
your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring:
40That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God.
41I amthe Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I
amthe Lord your God.
318Number s 15
Chapter 16
Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men:
2And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and
fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown:
3And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto
them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation areholy, every one of them,
and the Lord isamong them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation
of the Lord ?
4And when Moses heard it,he fell upon his face:
5And he spake unto Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the Lord will
shew who arehis, and who isholy; and will cause him to come near unto him: even him
whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.
6This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company;
7And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the Lord to morrow: and it shall be
that the man whom the Lord doth choose, he shall beholy: ye take too much upon you, ye
sons of Levi.
8And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:
9Seemeth it buta small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the
congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the
Lord , and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them?
10And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and
seek ye the priesthood also?
11For which cause both thou and all thy company aregathered together against the Lord :
and what isAaron, that ye murmur against him?
12And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not
come up:
13Is ita small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and
honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?
14Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given
us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not
come up.
15And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the Lord , Respect not thou their offering: I have
not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.
16And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the Lord , thou, and they,
and Aaron, to morrow:Numbers 16
319Number s 16
17And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the Lord
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each of youhis
censer.
18And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and
stood in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.
19And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregation.
20And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
21Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.
22And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall
one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?
23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
24Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram.
25And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed
him.
26And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these
wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
27So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and
Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of their tents, and their wives, and
their sons, and their little children.
28And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works;
for I have not done them of mine own mind.
29If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of
all men; then the Lord hath not sent me.
30But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up,
with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall under-
stand that these men have provoked the Lord .
31And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the
ground clave asunder that was under them:
32And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the
men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.
33They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed
upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
34And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the
earth swallow us up also.
35And there came out a fire from the Lord , and consumed the two hundred and fifty men
that offered incense.
320Number s 16
36And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
37Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.
38The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make them broad plates for
a covering of the altar: for they offered them before the Lord , therefore they are hallowed:
and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.
39And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had offered;
and they were made broad plates fora covering of the altar:
40To bea memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of
Aaron, come near to offer incense before the Lord ; that he be not as Korah, and as his
company: as the Lord said to him by the hand of Moses.
41But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against
Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord .
42And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against
Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation: and, behold, the cloud
covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.
43And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation.
44And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
45Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment.
And they fell upon their faces.
46And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar,
and put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them:
for there is wrath gone out from the Lord ; the plague is begun.
47And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation; and,
behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an
atonement for the people.
48And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.
49Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them
that died about the matter of Korah.
50And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and
the plague was stayed.
321Number s 16
Chapter 17
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to the
house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the house of their fathers twelve rods:
write thou every man’s name upon his rod.
3And thou shalt write Aaron’s name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod shall befor the head
of the house of their fathers.
4And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony,
where I will meet with you.
5And it shall come to pass, that the man’s rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom: and I
will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur
against you.
6And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their princes gave him
a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to their fathers’ houses, even twelve rods: and
the rod of Aaron was among their rods.
7And Moses laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of witness.
8And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and,
behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
9And Moses brought out all the rods from before the Lord unto all the children of Israel:
and they looked, and took every man his rod.
10And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aaron’s rod again before the testimony, to be
kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from
me, that they die not.
11And Moses did so:as the Lord commanded him, so did he.
12And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we all
perish.
13Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die: shall we be
consumed with dying?Numbers 17
322Number s 17
Chapter 18
And the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father’s house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity
of your priesthood.
2And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thee, that
they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall
minister before the tabernacle of witness.
3And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle: only they shall not
come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.
4And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation,
for all the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.
5And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no
wrath any more upon the children of Israel.
6And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel:
to you they aregiven asa gift for the Lord , to do the service of the tabernacle of the congreg-
ation.
7Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest’s office for every thing of the
altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your priest’s office unto you asa
service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
8And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the charge of mine
heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee have I given
them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.
9This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every oblation of theirs,
every meat offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of
theirs, which they shall render unto me, shall bemost holy for thee and for thy sons.
10In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee.
11And this isthine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the wave offerings of the children
of Israel: I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a
statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
12All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them
which they shall offer unto the Lord , them have I given thee.
13And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the Lord , shall be
thine; every one that is clean in thine house shall eat ofit.
14Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.
15Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they bring unto the Lord , whether
it beof men or beasts, shall be thine: nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely re-
deem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.Numbers 18
323Number s 18
16And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to
thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is
twenty gerahs.
17But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt
not redeem; they areholy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn
their fat foran offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the Lord .
18And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine.
19All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the Lord ,
have I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a
covenant of salt for ever before the Lord unto thee and to thy seed with thee.
20And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither
shalt thou have any part among them: I amthy part and thine inheritance among the children
of Israel.
21And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for
their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
22Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation,
lest they bear sin, and die.
23But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall
bear their iniquity: it shall bea statute for ever throughout your generations, that among
the children of Israel they have no inheritance.
24But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer asan heave offering unto the Lord ,
I have given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among the children
of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
25And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
26Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel
the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an
heave offering of it for the Lord , even a tenth part of the tithe.
27And thisyour heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the
threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the winepress.
28Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the Lord of all your tithes, which ye receive
of the children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof the Lord ’S heave offering to Aaron the
priest.
29Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the Lord , of all the best thereof,
even the hallowed part thereof out of it.
30Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then
it shall be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase
of the winepress.
324Number s 18
31And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it isyour reward for your
service in the tabernacle of the congregation.
32And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither
shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.
325Number s 18
Chapter 19
And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
2This isthe ordinance of the law which the Lord hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, wherein isno blemish, and
upon which never came yoke:
3And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her forth without the camp,
and oneshall slay her before his face:
4And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood
directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times:
5And oneshall burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her
dung, shall he burn:
6And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast itinto the midst of
the burning of the heifer.
7Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward
he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.
8And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and
shall be unclean until the even.
9And a man that isclean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the
camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for
a water of separation: it isa purification for sin.
10And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until
the even: and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among them, for a statute for ever.
11He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days.
12He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean:
but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
13Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself,
defileth the tabernacle of the Lord ; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the
water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness isyet
upon him.
14This isthe law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all that isin
the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
15And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, isunclean.
16And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body,
or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
17And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification
for sin, and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel:Numbers 19
326Number s 19
18And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip itin the water, and sprinkle itupon the tent,
and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched
a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave:
19And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh
day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself
in water, and shall be clean at even.
20But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off
from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the Lord : the water
of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him; he isunclean.
21And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation
shall wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until
even.
22And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth
itshall be unclean until even.
327Number s 19
Chapter 20
Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin
in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried
there.
2And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against
Moses and against Aaron.
3And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we had died when
our brethren died before the Lord !
4And why have ye brought up the congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, that we
and our cattle should die there?
5And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it isno place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither isthere any water
to drink.
6And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the door of the taber-
nacle of the congregation, and they fell upon their faces: and the glory of the Lord appeared
unto them.
7And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
8Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt
bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their
beasts drink.
9And Moses took the rod from before the Lord , as he commanded him.
10And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said
unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?
11And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water
came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.
12And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify
me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into
the land which I have given them.
13This isthe water of Meribah; because the children of Israel strove with the Lord , and he
was sanctified in them.
14And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy
brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us:
15How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the
Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers:
16And when we cried unto the Lord , he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought
us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we arein Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border:Numbers 20
328Number s 20
17Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass through the fields, or through
the vineyards, neither will we drink ofthe water of the wells: we will go by the king’s high
way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders.
18And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with
the sword.
19And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way: and if I and my
cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only, without doing any thing else, go
through on my feet.
20And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much
people, and with a strong hand.
21Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned
away from him.
22And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh, and
came unto mount Hor.
23And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the land of
Edom, saying,
24Aaron shall be gathered unto his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have
given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah.
25Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor:
26And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son: and Aaron shall be
gathered unto his people, and shall die there.
27And Moses did as the Lord commanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight
of all the congregation.
28And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron
died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
29And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty
days, even all the house of Israel.
329Number s 20
Chapter 21
And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came
by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners.
2And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord , and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people
into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.
3And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they
utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place Hormah.
4And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to compass the land
of Edom: and the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way.
5And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up
out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there isno bread, neither is there any water; and
our soul loatheth this light bread.
6And the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much
people of Israel died.
7Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken
against the Lord , and against thee; pray unto the Lord , that he take away the serpents from
us. And Moses prayed for the people.
8And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it
shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.
9And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a
serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.
10And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.
11And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the wilderness which is
before Moab, toward the sunrising.
12From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.
13From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which isin the wil-
derness that cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon isthe border of Moab,
between Moab and the Amorites.
14Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord , What he did in the Red sea, and
in the brooks of Arnon,
15And at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the
border of Moab.
16And from thence they went to Beer: that isthe well whereof the Lord spake unto Moses,
Gather the people together, and I will give them water.
17Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:
18The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction ofthe
lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah:Numbers 21
330Number s 21
19And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:
20And from Bamoth inthe valley, that isin the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which
looketh toward Jeshimon.
21And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
22Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we
will not drink ofthe waters of the well: butwe will go along by the king’s high way, until we
be past thy borders.
23And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border: but Sihon gathered all his
people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and
fought against Israel.
24And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon
unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for the border of the children of Ammon
was strong.
25And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon,
and in all the villages thereof.
26For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the
former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.
27Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be
built and prepared:
28For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed
Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon.
29Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath given his sons that
escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites.
30We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste
even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.
31Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
32And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages thereof, and drove out the
Amorites that were there.
33And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan went
out against them, he, and all his people, to the battle at Edrei.
34And the Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand, and
all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
35So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was none left him alive:
and they possessed his land.
331Number s 21
Chapter 22
And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side
Jordan byJericho.
2And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
3And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many: and Moab was distressed
because of the children of Israel.
4And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are
round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was
king of the Moabites at that time.
5He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, which isby the river
of the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come
out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me:
6Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they aretoo mighty for me:
peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the
land: for I wot that he whom thou blessest isblessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.
7And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination
in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spake unto him the words of Balak.
8And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again, as the Lord
shall speak unto me: and the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.
9And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men arethese with thee?
10And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me,
saying,
11Behold, there isa people come out of Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come
now, curse me them; peradventure I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.
12And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people:
for they areblessed.
13And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your
land: for the Lord refuseth to give me leave to go with you.
14And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuseth
to come with us.
15And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they.
16And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the son of Zippor, Let nothing,
I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto me:
17For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will do whatsoever thou sayest unto
me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.Numbers 22
332Number s 22
18And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his
house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less
or more.
19Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what the Lord
will say unto me more.
20And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men come to call thee,
rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.
21And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of
Moab.
22And God’s anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the Lord stood in the
way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants
were with him.
23And the ass saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his
hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balaam smote
the ass, to turn her into the way.
24But the angel of the Lord stood in a path of the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a
wall on that side.
25And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord , she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed
Balaam’s foot against the wall: and he smote her again.
26And the angel of the Lord went further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way
to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
27And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord , she fell down under Balaam: and Balaam’s
anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a staff.
28And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done
unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?
29And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword
in mine hand, for now would I kill thee.
30And the ass said unto Balaam, Amnot I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since
I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.
31Then the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in
the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and fell flat on his
face.
32And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these
three times? behold, I went out to withstand thee, because thyway is perverse before me:
33And the ass saw me, and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from
me, surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.
34And Balaam said unto the angel of the Lord , I have sinned; for I knew not that thou
stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back again.
333Number s 22
35And the angel of the Lord said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but only the word that I
shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
36And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto a city
of Moab, which isin the border of Arnon, which isin the utmost coast.
37And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore
camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour?
38And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say
any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.
39And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.
40And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that were with
him.
41And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the
high places of Baal, that thence he might see the utmost part of the people.
334Number s 22
Chapter 23
And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven
oxen and seven rams.
2And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock
and a ram.
3And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go: peradventure the
Lord will come to meet me: and whatsoever he sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to
an high place.
4And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered
upon every altar a bullock and a ram.
5And the Lord put a word in Balaam’s mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus thou
shalt speak.
6And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt sacrifice, he, and all the princes
of Moab.
7And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram,
out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.
8How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the Lord hath
not defied?
9For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall
dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
10Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die
the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
11And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine
enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed them altogether.
12And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord hath put in
my mouth?
13And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence
thou mayest see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not see them
all: and curse me them from thence.
14And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven
altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
15And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet the Lord yonder.
16And the Lord met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balak,
and say thus.
17And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab
with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the Lord spoken?Numbers 23
335Number s 23
18And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou
son of Zippor:
19God isnot a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath
he said, and shall he not do it?or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
20Behold, I have received commandment to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse
it.
21He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lord
his God iswith him, and the shout of a king isamong them.
22God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.
23Surely there isno enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel:
according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!
24Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young lion: he shall
not lie down until he eat ofthe prey, and drink the blood of the slain.
25And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.
26But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee, saying, All that the Lord
speaketh, that I must do?
27And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another place;
peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence.
28And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh toward Jeshimon.
29And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bul-
locks and seven rams.
30And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
336Number s 23
Chapter 24
And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he went not, as at other
times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
2And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents according to their
tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.
3And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose
eyes are open hath said:
4He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling
into a trance, but having his eyes open:
5How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!
6As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river’s side, as the trees of lign aloes
which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.
7He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall bein many waters, and his
king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
8God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shall
eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with
his arrows.
9He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed ishe
that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee.
10And Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and
Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether
blessed them these three times.
11Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but,
lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honour.
12And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers which thou sentest unto
me, saying,
13If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the command-
ment of the Lord , to do either good or bad of mine own mind; butwhat the Lord saith, that
will I speak?
14And now, behold, I go unto my people: come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this
people shall do to thy people in the latter days.
15And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man
whose eyes are open hath said:
16He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High,
which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:Numbers 24
337Number s 24
17I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out
of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and
destroy all the children of Sheth.
18And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies; and Israel
shall do valiantly.
19Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth
of the city.
20And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the
first of the nations; but his latter end shall bethat he perish for ever.
21And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwelling-
place, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.
22Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
23And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God doeth this!
24And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict
Eber, and he also shall perish for ever.
25And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak also went his way.
338Number s 24
Chapter 25
And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab.
2And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and
bowed down to their gods.
3And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel.
4And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before
the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel.
5And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto
Baalpeor.
6And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a
Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the
children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
7And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it,he rose up from
among the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand;
8And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the
man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children
of Israel.
9And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.
10And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
11Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from
the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not
the children of Israel in my jealousy.
12Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:
13And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood;
because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.
14Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the Midianitish wo-
man, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites.
15And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur;
he was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian.
16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
17Vex the Midianites, and smite them:
18For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor,
and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain
in the day of the plague for Peor’s sake.Numbers 25
339Number s 25
Chapter 26
And it came to pass after the plague, that the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Eleazar
the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
2Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and
upward, throughout their fathers’ house, all that are able to go to war in Israel.
3And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan near
Jericho, saying,
4Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the Lord commanded
Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt.
5Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the
family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:
6Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
7These arethe families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered of them were forty
and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
8And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.
9And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram,
which were famous in the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the
company of Korah, when they strove against the Lord :
10And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that
company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became a
sign.
11Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.
12The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of
Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
13Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
14These arethe families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred.
15The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of
Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
16Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
17Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
18These arethe families of the children of Gad according to those that were numbered of
them, forty thousand and five hundred.
19The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
20And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of
Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.
21And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the
family of the Hamulites.Numbers 26
340Number s 26
22These arethe families of Judah according to those that were numbered of them, threescore
and sixteen thousand and five hundred.
23Ofthe sons of Issachar after their families: ofTola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua,
the family of the Punites:
24Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
25These arethe families of Issachar according to those that were numbered of them,
threescore and four thousand and three hundred.
26Ofthe sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon,
the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
27These arethe families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them,
threescore thousand and five hundred.
28The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and Ephraim.
29Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead:
of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.
30These arethe sons of Gilead: ofJeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of
the Helekites:
31And ofAsriel, the family of the Asrielites: and ofShechem, the family of the Shechemites:
32And ofShemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and ofHepher, the family of the Hepherites.
33And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the names of the
daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
34These arethe families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and two
thousand and seven hundred.
35These arethe sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the
Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
36And these arethe sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
37These arethe families of the sons of Ephraim according to those that were numbered of
them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These arethe sons of Joseph after their
families.
38The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel,
the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
39Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
40And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of
Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
41These arethe sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that were numbered of them
were forty and five thousand and six hundred.
42These arethe sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites.
These arethe families of Dan after their families.
341Number s 26
43All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and four thousand and four hundred.
44Ofthe children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of
Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
45Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the
Malchielites.
46And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.
47These arethe families of the sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of
them; who were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
48Ofthe sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of
Guni, the family of the Gunites:
49Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
50These arethe families of Naphtali according to their families: and they that were numbered
of them were forty and five thousand and four hundred.
51These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand
seven hundred and thirty.
52And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
53Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
54To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt give the less inherit-
ance: to every one shall his inheritance be given according to those that were numbered of
him.
55Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of
their fathers they shall inherit.
56According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between many and few.
57And these arethey that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon,
the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family
of the Merarites.
58These arethe families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites,
the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And
Kohath begat Amram.
59And the name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother
bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
60And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
61And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the Lord .
62And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand, all males from
a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because
there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.
342Number s 26
63These arethey that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered
the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
64But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest
numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
65For the Lord had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not
left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
343Number s 26
Chapter 27
Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son
of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these
are the names of his daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.
2And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all
the congregation, bythe door of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,
3Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and
had no sons.
4Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath
no son? Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our father.
5And Moses brought their cause before the Lord .
6And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
7The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an
inheritance among their father’s brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their
father to pass unto them.
8And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man die, and have no son,
then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.
9And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.
10And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father’s brethren.
11And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman
that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of
Israel a statute of judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses.
12And the Lord said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount Abarim, and see the land
which I have given unto the children of Israel.
13And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy
brother was gathered.
14For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congreg-
ation, to sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that isthe water of Meribah in Kadesh
in the wilderness of Zin.
15And Moses spake unto the Lord , saying,
16Let the Lord , the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
17Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead
them out, and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep
which have no shepherd.
18And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is
the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;Numbers 27
344Number s 27
19And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a
charge in their sight.
20And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children
of Israel may be obedient.
21And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judg-
ment of Urim before the Lord : at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come
in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
22And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before
Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
23And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the
hand of Moses.
345Number s 27
Chapter 28
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, fora sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in their
due season.
3And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto
the Lord ; two lambs of the first year without spot day by day, fora continual burnt offering.
4The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even;
5And a tenth part of an ephah of flour for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of
an hin of beaten oil.
6It isa continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a
sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord .
7And the drink offering thereof shall bethe fourth part of an hin for the one lamb: in the
holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the Lord fora drink offering.
8And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as
the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it,a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the Lord .
9And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals
of flour fora meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof:
10This isthe burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his
drink offering.
11And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord ;
two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot;
12And three tenth deals of flour fora meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and
two tenth deals of flour fora meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
13And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil fora meat offering unto one lamb; for
a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord .
14And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third part
of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb: this isthe burnt offering of
every month throughout the months of the year.
15And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the Lord shall be offered, beside the con-
tinual burnt offering, and his drink offering.
16And in the fourteenth day of the first month isthe passover of the Lord .
17And in the fifteenth day of this month isthe feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be
eaten.
18In the first day shall bean holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work therein:Numbers 28
346Number s 28
19But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire fora burnt offering unto the Lord ; two young
bullocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you without
blemish:
20And their meat offering shall be offlour mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer
for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram;
21A several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
22And one goat fora sin offering, to make an atonement for you.
23Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning, which isfor a continual burnt
offering.
24After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice
made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord : it shall be offered beside the continual burnt
offering, and his drink offering.
25And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.
26Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat offering unto the Lord ,
after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work:
27But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord ; two young bullocks,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year;
28And their meat offering of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two
tenth deals unto one ram,
29A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs;
30And one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you.
31Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, (they shall
be unto you without blemish) and their drink offerings.
347Number s 28
Chapter 29
And in the seventh month, on the first dayof the month, ye shall have an holy convoc-
ation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.
2And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord ; one young bullock,
one ram, and seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
3And their meat offering shall be offlour mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock,
and two tenth deals for a ram,
4And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
5And one kid of the goats fora sin offering, to make an atonement for you:
6Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering,
and his meat offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet
savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord .
7And ye shall have on the tenth dayof this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye
shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work therein:
8But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord fora sweet savour; one young bullock, one
ram, and seven lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish:
9And their meat offering shall be offlour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a bullock,
and two tenth deals to one ram,
10A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
11One kid of the goats fora sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the con-
tinual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink offerings.
12And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye
shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days:
13And ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the
Lord ; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year; they shall be
without blemish:
14And their meat offering shall be offlour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams,
15And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs:
16And one kid of the goats fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat
offering, and his drink offering.
17And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs
of the first year without spot:
18And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for
the lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
19And one kid of the goats fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and the
meat offering thereof, and their drink offerings.Numbers 29
348Number s 29
20And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without
blemish;
21And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for
the lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
22And one goat fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.
23And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year
without blemish:
24Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
25And one kid of the goats fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat
offering, and his drink offering.
26And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year
without spot:
27And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for
the lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
28And one goat fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.
29And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year
without blemish:
30And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for
the lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
31And one goat fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and
his drink offering.
32And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year
without blemish:
33And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for
the lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
34And one goat fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and
his drink offering.
35On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work therein:
36But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord :
one bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
37Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the
lambs, shall beaccording to their number, after the manner:
38And one goat fora sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.
349Number s 29
39These things ye shall do unto the Lord in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your
freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink
offerings, and for your peace offerings.
40And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the Lord commanded Moses.
350Number s 29
Chapter 30
And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying,
This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.
2If a man vow a vow unto the Lord , or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall
not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.
3If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord , and bind herself by a bond, being in her father’s
house in her youth;
4And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her
father shall hold his peace at her: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith
she hath bound her soul shall stand.
5But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her
bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive her, because
her father disallowed her.
6And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered ought out of her lips,
wherewith she bound her soul;
7And her husband heard it,and held his peace at her in the day that he heard it:then her
vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
8But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it;then he shall make her vow
which she vowed, and that which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul,
of none effect: and the Lord shall forgive her.
9But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their
souls, shall stand against her.
10And if she vowed in her husband’s house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath;
11And her husband heard it,and held his peace at her, and disallowed her not: then all her
vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
12But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard them; then whatsoever
proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall
not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the Lord shall forgive her.
13Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her
husband may make it void.
14But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth
all her vows, or all her bonds, which areupon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his
peace at her in the day that he heard them.
15But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard them; then he shall bear
her iniquity.
16These arethe statutes, which the Lord commanded Moses, between a man and his wife,
between the father and his daughter, being yetin her youth in her father’s house.Numbers 30
351Number s 30
Chapter 31
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy
people.
3And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let
them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian.
4Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.
5So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve
thousand armed for war.
6And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of
Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his
hand.
7And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses; and they slew all
the males.
8And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi,
and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor
they slew with the sword.
9And the children of Israel took allthe women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and
took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods.
10And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire.
11And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of beasts.
12And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the
priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of
Moab, which areby Jordan near Jericho.
13And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth
to meet them without the camp.
14And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and
captains over hundreds, which came from the battle.
15And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
16Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit
trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congreg-
ation of the Lord .
17Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known
man by lying with him.
18But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for
yourselves.Numbers 31
352Number s 31
19And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and
whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both yourselves and your captives on the third
day, and on the seventh day.
20And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and all work of goats’ hair, and
all things made of wood.
21And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the battle, This is the
ordinance of the law which the Lord commanded Moses;
22Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
23Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make itgo through the fire, and it shall be
clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth not
the fire ye shall make go through the water.
24And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward
ye shall come into the camp.
25And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
26Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the
priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation:
27And divide the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who went
out to battle, and between all the congregation:
28And levy a tribute unto the Lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one soul of
five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep:
29Take itof their half, and give itunto Eleazar the priest, foran heave offering of the Lord .
30And of the children of Israel’s half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of
the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the
Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord .
31And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses.
32And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred
thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,
33And threescore and twelve thousand beeves,
34And threescore and one thousand asses,
35And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying
with him.
36And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three
hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred sheep:
37And the Lord ’S tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.
38And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the Lord ’S tribute was threescore
and twelve.
39And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the Lord ’S tribute was
threescore and one.
353Number s 31
40And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the Lord ’S tribute was thirty and two
persons.
41And Moses gave the tribute, which wasthe Lord ’S heave offering, unto Eleazar the priest,
as the Lord commanded Moses.
42And of the children of Israel’s half, which Moses divided from the men that warred,
43(Now the half that pertained unto the congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty
thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
44And thirty and six thousand beeves,
45And thirty thousand asses and five hundred,
46And sixteen thousand persons;)
47Even of the children of Israel’s half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of
beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord ;
as the Lord commanded Moses.
48And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands,
and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:
49And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are
under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.
50We have therefore brought an oblation for the Lord , what every man hath gotten, of jewels
of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our
souls before the Lord .
51And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all wrought jewels.
52And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the Lord , of the captains of thou-
sands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.
53(Forthe men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
54And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hun-
dreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation, fora memorial for the children
of Israel before the Lord .
354Number s 31
Chapter 32
Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle:
and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a
place for cattle;
2The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, and to
Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying,
3Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and
Nebo, and Beon,
4Even the country which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, isa land for cattle,
and thy servants have cattle:
5Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy
servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.
6And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shall your
brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?
7And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the
land which the Lord hath given them?
8Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land.
9For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the
heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the Lord had
given them.
10And the Lord ’S anger was kindled the same time, and he sware, saying,
11Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward,
shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they
have not wholly followed me:
12Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun: for they have
wholly followed the Lord .
13And the Lord ’S anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilder-
ness forty years, until all the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the Lord , was
consumed.
14And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers’ stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment
yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel.
15For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and ye
shall destroy all this people.
16And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle,
and cities for our little ones:Numbers 32
355Number s 32
17But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought
them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the in-
habitants of the land.
18We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man
his inheritance.
19For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward; because our inherit-
ance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward.
20And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord
to war,
21And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord , until he hath driven out his
enemies from before him,
22And the land be subdued before the Lord : then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless
before the Lord , and before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the Lord .
23But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord : and be sure your sin will
find you out.
24Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and do that which hath
proceeded out of your mouth.
25And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants
will do as my lord commandeth.
26Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead:
27But thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the Lord to battle, as my
lord saith.
28So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun,
and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel:
29And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass
with you over Jordan, every man armed to battle, before the Lord , and the land shall be
subdued before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession:
30But if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in
the land of Canaan.
31And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying, As the Lord hath
said unto thy servants, so will we do.
32We will pass over armed before the Lord into the land of Canaan, that the possession of
our inheritance on this side Jordan may beours.
33And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben,
and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the
Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the
coasts, even the cities of the country round about.
34And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
356Number s 32
35And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
36And Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.
37And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim,
38And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and gave other
names unto the cities which they builded.
39And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispos-
sessed the Amorite which was in it.
40And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.
41And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof, and called them
Havothjair.
42And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his
own name.
357Number s 32
Chapter 33
These arethe journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of
Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
2And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of
the Lord : and these aretheir journeys according to their goings out.
3And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month;
on the morrow after the passover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the
sight of all the Egyptians.
4For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the Lord had smitten among them: upon
their gods also the Lord executed judgments.
5And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth.
6And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which isin the edge of the wilder-
ness.
7And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth, which isbefore
Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol.
8And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into
the wilderness, and went three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in
Marah.
9And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were twelve fountains
of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they pitched there.
10And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.
11And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
12And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.
13And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.
14And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was no water for the
people to drink.
15And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.
16And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibrothhattaavah.
17And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.
18And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.
19And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez.
20And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah.
21And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.
22And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.
23And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.
24And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.
25And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.Numbers 33
358Number s 33
26And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.
27And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.
28And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.
29And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.
30And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.
31And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan.
32And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad.
33And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.
34And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.
35And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber.
36And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness of Zin, which isKadesh.
37And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of
Edom.
38And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of the Lord , and
died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt,
in the first dayof the fifth month.
39And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he died in mount Hor.
40And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, heard of
the coming of the children of Israel.
41And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.
42And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.
43And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.
44And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the border of Moab.
45And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad.
46And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim.
47And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before
Nebo.
48And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by
Jordan near Jericho.
49And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto Abelshittim in the plains of
Moab.
50And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,
51Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan
into the land of Canaan;
52Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all
their pictures, and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places:
359Number s 33
53And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein: for I have given you
the land to possess it.
54And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: and to the
more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance:
every man’s inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of
your fathers ye shall inherit.
55But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you; then it shall come
to pass, that those which ye let remain of them shall bepricks in your eyes, and thorns in
your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.
56Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I thought to do unto them.
360Number s 33
Chapter 34
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan with the
coasts thereof:)
3Then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of Edom,
and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea eastward:
4And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin:
and the going forth thereof shall be from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to
Hazaraddar, and pass on to Azmon:
5And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and the goings
out of it shall be at the sea.
6And as forthe western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border: this shall be
your west border.
7And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall point out for you mount
Hor:
8From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings
forth of the border shall be to Zedad:
9And the border shall go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall be at Hazar- enan:
this shall be your north border.
10And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to Shepham:
11And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the
border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward:
12And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt sea:
this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.
13And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This isthe land which ye shall in-
herit by lot, which the Lord commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe:
14For the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and the
tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their fathers, have received their in-
heritance; and half the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance:
15The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near
Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.
16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
17These arethe names of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun.
18And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance.
19And the names of the men arethese: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.Numbers 34
361Number s 34
20And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
21Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
22And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli.
23The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, Hanniel
the son of Ephod.
24And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
25And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
26And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
27And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
28And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
29These are they whom the Lord commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children
of Israel in the land of Canaan.
362Number s 34
Chapter 35
And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,
2Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their
possession cities to dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities
round about them.
3And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle,
and for their goods, and for all their beasts.
4And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall
of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
5And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on
the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the
north side two thousand cubits; and the city shall bein the midst: this shall be to them the
suburbs of the cities.
6And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there shall besix cities for refuge,
which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add
forty and two cities.
7Soall the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall beforty and eight cities: them shall
ye give with their suburbs.
8And the cities which ye shall give shall beof the possession of the children of Israel: from
them that have many ye shall give many; but from them that have few ye shall give few: every
one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he inheriteth.
9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
10Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into
the land of Canaan;
11Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee
thither, which killeth any person at unawares.
12And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not,
until he stand before the congregation in judgment.
13And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for refuge.
14Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of
Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.
15These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and
for the sojourner among them: that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee
thither.
16And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he isa murderer: the
murderer shall surely be put to death.Numbers 35
363Number s 35
17And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a
murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
18Or ifhe smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may die, and he die, he
isa murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
19The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he meeteth him, he shall slay
him.
20But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;
21Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him shall surely be put
to death; forhe isa murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth
him.
22But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon him any thing without
laying of wait,
23Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast itupon him, that
he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm:
24Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood according
to these judgments:
25And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood,
and the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he
shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.
26But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge,
whither he was fled;
27And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the
revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:
28Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest:
but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.
29So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.
30Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses:
but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die.
31Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which isguilty of death:
but he shall be surely put to death.
32And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should
come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
33So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are:for blood it defileth the land: and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
34Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell: for I the Lord dwell
among the children of Israel.
364Number s 35
Chapter 36
And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses,
and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel:
2And they said, The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to
the children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of
Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.
3And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then
shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the
inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of our
inheritance.
4And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put
unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be
taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.
5And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of the Lord , saying,
The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.
6This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad,
saying, Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their
father shall they marry.
7So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every
one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
8And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel,
shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may
enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.
9Neither shall the inheritance remove from onetribe to another tribe; but every one of the
tribes of the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance.
10Even as the Lord commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad:
11For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad,
were married unto their father’s brothers’ sons:
12And they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and
their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
13These arethe commandments and the judgments, which the Lord commanded by the
hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.Numbers 36
365Number s 36
The Fifth Book of Moses, called
DeuteronomyDeuteronomy
366Deuter onomy
Chapter 1
These bethe words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilder-
ness, in the plain over against the Red sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and
Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
2(There areeleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.)
3And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first dayof the month,
that Moses spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the Lord had given him
in commandment unto them;
4After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the
king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei:
5On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying,
6The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this
mount:
7Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto all the
places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the
sea side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river
Euphrates.
8Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land which the Lord sware
unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.
9And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone:
10The Lord your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye arethis day as the stars of heaven
for multitude.
11(The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and
bless you, as he hath promised you!)
12How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
13Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make
them rulers over you.
14And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for usto do.
15So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you,
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains
over tens, and officers among your tribes.
16And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren,
and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that iswith him.
17Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great;
ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God’s: and the cause that is too
hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it.
18And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.Deuteronomy 1
367Deuter onomy 1
19And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wil-
derness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the Lord our God
commanded us; and we came to Kadeshbarnea.
20And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our
God doth give unto us.
21Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and possess it,as the Lord
God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.
22And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send men before us,
and they shall search us out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up,
and into what cities we shall come.
23And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:
24And they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and
searched it out.
25And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought itdown unto us, and
brought us word again, and said, It isa good land which the Lord our God doth give us.
26Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the commandment of the Lord
your God:
27And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the Lord hated us, he hath brought us
forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.
28Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is
greater and taller than we; the cities aregreat and walled up to heaven; and moreover we
have seen the sons of the Anakims there.
29Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.
30The Lord your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, according to all that
he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;
31And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the Lord thy God bare thee, as a
man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.
32Yet in this thing ye did not believe the Lord your God,
33Who went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your tents in,in fire
by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day.
34And the Lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and sware, saying,
35Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see that good land, which I
sware to give unto your fathers,
36Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he
hath trodden upon, and to his children, because he hath wholly followed the Lord .
37Also the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither.
38ButJoshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall go in thither: encourage
him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
368Deuter onomy 1
39Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your children, which in
that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them
will I give it, and they shall possess it.
40But as foryou, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red
sea.
41Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the Lord , we will go up and
fight, according to all that the Lord our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on
every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hill.
42And the Lord said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight; for I amnot among
you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.
43So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the commandment of
the Lord , and went presumptuously up into the hill.
44And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you,
as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah.
45And ye returned and wept before the Lord ; but the Lord would not hearken to your voice,
nor give ear unto you.
46So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye abode there.
369Deuter onomy 1
Chapter 2
Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as
the Lord spake unto me: and we compassed mount Seir many days.
2And the Lord spake unto me, saying,
3Ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.
4And command thou the people, saying, Ye areto pass through the coast of your brethren
the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed
unto yourselves therefore:
5Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as a foot breadth;
because I have given mount Seir unto Esau fora possession.
6Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them
for money, that ye may drink.
7For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking
through this great wilderness: these forty years the Lord thy God hath been with thee; thou
hast lacked nothing.
8And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir,
through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Eziongaber, we turned and passed by the
way of the wilderness of Moab.
9And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle:
for I will not give thee of their land fora possession; because I have given Ar unto the children
of Lot fora possession.
10The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;
11Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.
12The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau succeeded them, when
they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the
land of his possession, which the Lord gave unto them.
13Now rise up, said I,and get you over the brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.
14And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were come over the brook
Zered, wasthirty and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out
from among the host, as the Lord sware unto them.
15For indeed the hand of the Lord was against them, to destroy them from among the host,
until they were consumed.
16So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among
the people,
17That the Lord spake unto me, saying,
18Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:Deuteronomy 2
370Deuter onomy 2
19And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor
meddle with them: for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon anyposses-
sion; because I have given it unto the children of Lot fora possession.
20(That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Am-
monites call them Zamzummims;
21A people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the Lord destroyed them before
them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead:
22As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims
from before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day:
23And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came
forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
24Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into
thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: begin to possess it,and contend
with him in battle.
25This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that
areunder the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in an-
guish because of thee.
26And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon
with words of peace, saying,
27Let me pass through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn unto the
right hand nor to the left.
28Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I
may drink: only I will pass through on my feet;
29(As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Ar, did
unto me;) until I shall pass over Jordan into the land which the Lord our God giveth us.
30But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the Lord thy God hardened
his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth
this day.
31And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee:
begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.
32Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz.
33And the Lord our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all
his people.
34And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the men, and the women,
and the little ones, of every city, we left none to remain:
35Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.
371Deuter onomy 2
36From Aroer, which isby the brink of the river of Arnon, and from the city that isby the
river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city too strong for us: the Lord our God delivered
all unto us:
37Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto any place of the
river Jabbok, norunto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the Lord our God
forbad us.
372Deuter onomy 2
Chapter 3
Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out
against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
2And the Lord said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and all his people, and his
land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
3So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his
people: and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.
4And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city which we took not from them,
threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
5All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars; beside unwalled towns a great
many.
6And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying
the men, women, and children, of every city.
7But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.
8And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites the land that
was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon;
9(Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion; and the Amorites call it Shenir;)
10All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of
the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
11For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was
a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length
thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.
12And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which isby the river Arnon,
and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
13And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe
of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.
14Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and
Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashan- Havothjair, unto this day.
15And I gave Gilead unto Machir.
16And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the river
Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto the river Jabbok, which isthe border of the
children of Ammon;
17The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of
the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah eastward.Deuteronomy 3
373Deuter onomy 3
18And I commanded you at that time, saying, The Lord your God hath given you this
land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all
that aremeet for the war.
19But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (forI know that ye have much cattle,)
shall abide in your cities which I have given you;
20Until the Lord have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also
possess the land which the Lord your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall
ye return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.
21And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that the Lord
your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall the Lord do unto all the kingdoms
whither thou passest.
22Ye shall not fear them: for the Lord your God he shall fight for you.
23And I besought the Lord at that time, saying,
24O Lord GOD, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand:
for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according
to thy might?
25I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that isbeyond Jordan, that goodly
mountain, and Lebanon.
26But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the Lord said
unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto me of this matter.
27Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and
southward, and eastward, and behold itwith thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this
Jordan.
28But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he shall go over before
this people, and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.
29So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.
374Deuter onomy 3
Chapter 4
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I
teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the Lord
God of your fathers giveth you.
2Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought
from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.
3Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baalpeor: for all the men that followed
Baalpeor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed them from among you.
4But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God arealive every one of you this day.
5Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded
me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.
6Keep therefore and do them; for this isyour wisdom and your understanding in the sight
of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation isa wise
and understanding people.
7For what nation is there sogreat, who hath God sonigh unto them, as the Lord our God is
in all things that we call upon him for?
8And what nation is there sogreat, that hath statutes and judgments sorighteous as all this
law, which I set before you this day?
9Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which
thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach
them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons;
10Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said
unto me, Gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they
may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach
their children.
11And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire
unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.
12And the Lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words,
but saw no similitude; only ye heard a voice.
13And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten
commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone.
14And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that
ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it.
15Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the
day that the Lord spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire:
16Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of male or female,Deuteronomy 4
375Deuter onomy 4
17The likeness of any beast that ison the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth
in the air,
18The likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that isin
the waters beneath the earth:
19And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon,
and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve
them, which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.
20But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of
Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as ye arethis day.
21Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, and sware that I should not go
over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land, which the Lord thy God giveth
thee foran inheritance:
22But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shall go over, and possess
that good land.
23Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God, which he
made with you, and make you a graven image, orthe likeness of any thing, which the Lord
thy God hath forbidden thee.
24For the Lord thy God isa consuming fire, even a jealous God.
25When thou shalt beget children, and children’s children, and ye shall have remained
long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, orthe likeness of
any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger:
26I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish
from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days
upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.
27And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number
among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you.
28And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men’s hands, wood and stone, which neither
see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
29But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him
with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
30When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter
days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;
31(For the Lord thy God isa merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee,
nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.
32For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created
man upon the earth, and askfrom the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath
been any such thing as this great thing is,or hath been heard like it?
376Deuter onomy 4
33Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast
heard, and live?
34Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched
out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt
before your eyes?
35Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the Lord he isGod; there isnone
else beside him.
36Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee: and upon earth
he shewed thee his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
37And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought
thee out in his sight with his mighty power out of Egypt;
38To drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou art,to bring thee
in, to give thee their land foran inheritance, as it isthis day.
39Know therefore this day, and consider itin thine heart, that the Lord he isGod in heaven
above, and upon the earth beneath: there isnone else.
40Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee
this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest
prolong thydays upon the earth, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, for ever.
41Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;
42That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated
him not in times past; and that fleeing unto one of these cities he might live:
43Namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in
Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.
44And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel:
45These arethe testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spake unto
the children of Israel, after they came forth out of Egypt,
46On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Bethpeor, in the land of Sihon king of the
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, after they
were come forth out of Egypt:
47And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites,
which were on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;
48From Aroer, which isby the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is
Hermon,
49And all the plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the
springs of Pisgah.
377Deuter onomy 4
Chapter 5
And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judg-
ments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.
2The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
3The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who areall of us
here alive this day.
4The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire,
5(I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the word of the Lord : for ye
were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying,
6I amthe Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage.
7Thou shalt have none other gods before me.
8Thou shalt not make thee anygraven image, orany likeness of any thing that isin heaven
above, or that isin the earth beneath, or that isin the waters beneath the earth:
9Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God ama
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me,
10And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.
11Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
12Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee.
13Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work:
14But the seventh day isthe sabbath of the Lord thy God: in itthou shalt not do any work,
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine
ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that iswithin thy gates; that thy
manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.
15And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God
brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the
Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.
16Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that
thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee.
17Thou shalt not kill.
18Neither shalt thou commit adultery.
19Neither shalt thou steal.
20Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.Deuteronomy 5
378Deuter onomy 5
21Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour’s wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour’s
house, his field, or his manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that
isthy neighbour’s.
22These words the Lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of
the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more.
And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.
23And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the
mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes,
and your elders;
24And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and
we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth
talk with man, and he liveth.
25Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice
of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die.
26For who is there ofall flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of
the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?
27Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that
the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear it,and do it.
28And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the Lord said
unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto
thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.
29O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my com-
mandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!
30Go say to them, Get you into your tents again.
31But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments,
and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them
in the land which I give them to possess it.
32Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God hath commanded you: ye shall not
turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
33Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God hath commanded you, that ye may
live, and that it may bewell with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which
ye shall possess.
379Deuter onomy 5
Chapter 6
Now these arethe commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord
your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to
possess it:
2That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments,
which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life; and
that thy days may be prolonged.
3Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it;that it may be well with thee, and that
ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land
that floweth with milk and honey.
4Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God isone Lord :
5And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy might.
6And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:
7And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou
sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up.
8And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes.
9And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.
10And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he
sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly
cities, which thou buildedst not,
11And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou
diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have
eaten and be full;
12Then beware lest thou forget the Lord , which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage.
13Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name.
14Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which areround about you;
15(For the Lord thy God isa jealous God among you) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be
kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.
16Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.
17Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God, and his testimonies,
and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.Deuteronomy 6
380Deuter onomy 6
18And thou shalt do that which isright and good in the sight of the Lord : that it may be well
with thee, and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the Lord sware unto
thy fathers,
19To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the Lord hath spoken.
20And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean the testimonies, and
the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded you?
21Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh’s bondmen in Egypt; and the Lord
brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand:
22And the Lord shewed signs and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and
upon all his household, before our eyes:
23And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which
he sware unto our fathers.
24And the Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our
good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it isat this day.
25And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the
Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.
381Deuter onomy 6
Chapter 7
When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it,
and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the
Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven
nations greater and mightier than thou;
2And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and ut-
terly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
3Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his
son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.
4For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will
the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.
5But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images,
and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire.
6For thou artan holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to
be a special people unto himself, above all people that areupon the face of the earth.
7The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number
than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people:
8But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn
unto your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you
out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
9Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he isGod, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant
and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations;
10And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to
him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.
11Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
I command thee this day, to do them.
12Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do
them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he
sware unto thy fathers:
13And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy
womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy
kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
14Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male or female barren among
you, or among your cattle.
15And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases
of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.Deuteronomy 7
382Deuter onomy 7
16And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine
eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will bea snare
unto thee.
17If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations aremore than I; how can I dispossess them?
18Thou shalt not be afraid of them: butshalt well remember what the Lord thy God did
unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;
19The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the
mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out: so
shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.
20Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and
hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.
21Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the Lord thy God isamong you, a mighty God
and terrible.
22And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and little: thou
mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
23But the Lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty
destruction, until they be destroyed.
24And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from
under heaven: there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed
them.
25The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or
gold that ison them, nor take itunto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it isan abomination
to the Lord thy God.
26Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like
it: butthou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it isa cursed thing.
383Deuter onomy 7
Chapter 8
All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye
may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your
fathers.
2And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in
the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what wasin thine heart, whether
thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no.
3And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou
knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth
not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth
man live.
4Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.
5Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, sothe Lord thy
God chasteneth thee.
6Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways,
and to fear him.
7For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains
and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;
8A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive,
and honey;
9A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it;
a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.
10When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good
land which he hath given thee.
11Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and
his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:
12Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;
13And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou hast is multiplied;
14Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth
out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage;
15Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the
rock of flint;
16Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;Deuteronomy 8
384Deuter onomy 8
17And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this
wealth.
18But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it ishe that giveth thee power to get wealth,
that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it isthis day.
19And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other gods, and
serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
20As the nations which the Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye
would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord your God.
385Deuter onomy 8
Chapter 9
Hear, O Israel: Thou artto pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater
and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven,
2A people great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom
thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak!
3Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God ishe which goeth over before thee;
asa consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so
shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath said unto thee.
4Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before
thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this land: but for
the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee.
5Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess
their land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out
from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the Lord sware unto thy fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
6Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it
for thy righteousness; for thou arta stiffnecked people.
7Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the
wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto
this place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord .
8Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath, so that the Lord was angry with you to have
destroyed you.
9When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant which the Lord made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty
nights, I neither did eat bread nor drink water:
10And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and
on them was written according to all the words, which the Lord spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.
11And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the Lord gave me the
two tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant.
12And the Lord said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which
thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned
aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.
13Furthermore the Lord spake unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it isa
stiffnecked people:
14Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven: and
I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.Deuteronomy 9
386Deuter onomy 9
15So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with fire: and the
two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.
16And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the Lord your God, and had made you
a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the Lord had commanded
you.
17And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before
your eyes.
18And I fell down before the Lord , as at the first, forty days and forty nights: I did neither
eat bread, nor drink water, because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in
the sight of the Lord , to provoke him to anger.
19For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wroth against
you to destroy you. But the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also.
20And the Lord was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron
also the same time.
21And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it,
and ground itvery small, even until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into
the brook that descended out of the mount.
22And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye provoked the Lord to wrath.
23Likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up and possess the land
which I have given you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the Lord your God,
and ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.
24Ye have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you.
25Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as I fell down at the first;
because the Lord had said he would destroy you.
26I prayed therefore unto the Lord , and said, O Lord GOD, destroy not thy people and thine
inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought
forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
27Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of
this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin:
28Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the Lord was not able to bring
them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought
them out to slay them in the wilderness.
29Yet they arethy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty
power and by thy stretched out arm.
387Deuter onomy 9
Chapter 10
At that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and
come up unto me into the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.
2And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest,
and thou shalt put them in the ark.
3And I made an ark ofshittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and
went up into the mount, having the two tables in mine hand.
4And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which
the Lord spake unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly:
and the Lord gave them unto me.
5And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which
I had made; and there they be, as the Lord commanded me.
6And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan
to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the
priest’s office in his stead.
7From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of
rivers of waters.
8At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the
Lord , to stand before the Lord to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.
9Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the Lord ishis inheritance,
according as the Lord thy God promised him.
10And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days and forty nights; and
the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also, and the Lord would not destroy thee.
11And the Lord said unto me, Arise, take thyjourney before the people, that they may go
in and possess the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.
12And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul,
13To keep the commandments of the Lord , and his statutes, which I command thee this day
for thy good?
14Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens isthe Lord ’S thy God, the earth also, with
all that therein is.
15Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them,
even you above all people, as it isthis day.
16Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.
17For the Lord your God isGod of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a
terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward:Deuteronomy 10
388Deuter onomy 10
18He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in
giving him food and raiment.
19Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
20Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and
swear by his name.
21He isthy praise, and he isthy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things,
which thine eyes have seen.
22Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons; and now the Lord thy
God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.
389Deuter onomy 10
Chapter 11
Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and
his judgments, and his commandments, alway.
2And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which have not known, and which
have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and
his stretched out arm,
3And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king
of Egypt, and unto all his land;
4And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he
made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the Lord
hath destroyed them unto this day;
5And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came into this place;
6And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents,
and all the substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:
7But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did.
8Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day, that ye may
be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye go to possess it;
9And that ye may prolong your days in the land, which the Lord sware unto your fathers to
give unto them and to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.
10For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, isnot as the land of Egypt, from
whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst itwith thy foot, as a garden
of herbs:
11But the land, whither ye go to possess it, isa land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water
of the rain of heaven:
12A land which the Lord thy God careth for: the eyes of the Lord thy God arealways upon
it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.
13And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which
I command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart
and with all your soul,
14That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter
rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
15And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full.
16Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve
other gods, and worship them;Deuteronomy 11
390Deuter onomy 11
17And then the Lord ’S wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there
be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lestye perish quickly from off the good
land which the Lord giveth you.
18Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind
them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.
19And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house,
and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
20And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates:
21That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land which the
Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.
22For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command you, to do
them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;
23Then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall possess
greater nations and mightier than yourselves.
24Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness
and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your
coast be.
25There shall no man be able to stand before you: forthe Lord your God shall lay the fear
of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto
you.
26Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse;
27A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you
this day:
28And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside
out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.
29And it shall come to pass, when the Lord thy God hath brought thee in unto the land
whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and
the curse upon mount Ebal.
30Arethey not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land
of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of
Moreh?
31For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the Lord your God giveth
you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.
32And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.
391Deuter onomy 11
Chapter 12
These arethe statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which
the Lord God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.
2Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served
their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:
3And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire;
and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out
of that place.
4Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God.
5But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his
name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:
6And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and
heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings
of your herds and of your flocks:
7And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your
hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.
8Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever isright
in his own eyes.
9For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which the Lord your God
giveth you.
10But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord your God giveth you
to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell
in safety;
11Then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause his name to
dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and your
sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which
ye vow unto the Lord :
12And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters,
and your menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that iswithin your gates;
forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.
13Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:
14But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy
burnt offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.
15Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth
after, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean
and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.
16Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as water.Deuteronomy 12
392Deuter onomy 12
17Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy
oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor
thy freewill offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:
18But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord thy God
shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the Levite that iswithin thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God in all
that thou puttest thine hands unto.
19Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth.
20When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thee, and thou
shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatso-
ever thy soul lusteth after.
21If the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from
thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the Lord hath given thee, as I
have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
22Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the
clean shall eat ofthem alike.
23Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood isthe life; and thou mayest not eat
the life with the flesh.
24Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.
25Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when
thou shalt do that which isright in the sight of the Lord .
26Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place
which the Lord shall choose:
27And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the
Lord thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the Lord
thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.
28Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee,
and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou doest that which isgood and right in
the sight of the Lord thy God.
29When the Lord thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest
to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;
30Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed
from before thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations
serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.
31Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God: for every abomination to the Lord , which
he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have
burnt in the fire to their gods.
393Deuter onomy 12
32What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor di-
minish from it.
394Deuter onomy 12
Chapter 13
If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a
wonder,
2And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go
after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;
3Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart
and with all your soul.
4Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and
obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.
5And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken
to turn youaway from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy
God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee.
6If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy
bosom, or thy friend, which isas thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;
7Namely, of the gods of the people which areround about you, nigh unto thee, or far off
from thee, from the oneend of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;
8Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him,
neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:
9But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.
10And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee
away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage.
11And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is
among you.
12If thou shalt hear sayin one of thy cities, which the Lord thy God hath given thee to
dwell there, saying,
13Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known;
14Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it betruth,
and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you;
15Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying
it utterly, and all that istherein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.Deuteronomy 13
395Deuter onomy 13
16And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn
with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the Lord thy God: and it shall be
an heap for ever; it shall not be built again.
17And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand: that the Lord may turn
from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and
multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;
18When thou shalt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep all his commandments
which I command thee this day, to do that which isright in the eyes of the Lord thy God.
396Deuter onomy 13
Chapter 14
Ye arethe children of the Lord your God: ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any
baldness between your eyes for the dead.
2For thou artan holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a
peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that areupon the earth.
3Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.
4These arethe beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and the goat,
5The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the
wild ox, and the chamois.
6And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and cheweth
the cud among the beasts, that ye shall eat.
7Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the
cloven hoof; asthe camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide
not the hoof; therefore they areunclean unto you.
8And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto
you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcase.
9These ye shall eat of all that arein the waters: all that have fins and scales shall ye eat:
10And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it isunclean unto you.
11Ofall clean birds ye shall eat.
12But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
13And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,
14And every raven after his kind,
15And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,
16The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan,
17And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant,
18And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.
19And every creeping thing that flieth isunclean unto you: they shall not be eaten.
20But ofall clean fowls ye may eat.
21Ye shall not eat ofany thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger
that isin thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou artan
holy people unto the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.
22Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.
23And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place
his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy
herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always.Deuteronomy 14
397Deuter onomy 14
24And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it; orif the place be
too far from thee, which the Lord thy God shall choose to set his name there, when the Lord
thy God hath blessed thee:
25Then shalt thou turn itinto money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go
unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose:
26And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for
sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt
eat there before the Lord thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household,
27And the Levite that iswithin thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor
inheritance with thee.
28At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same
year, and shalt lay itup within thy gates:
29And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,) and the stranger, and
the fatherless, and the widow, which arewithin thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be
satisfied; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.
398Deuter onomy 14
Chapter 15
At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.
2And this isthe manner of the release: Every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour
shall release it;he shall not exact itof his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called
the Lord ’S release.
3Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is thine with thy brother thine
hand shall release;
4Save when there shall be no poor among you; for the Lord shall greatly bless thee in the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee foran inheritance to possess it:
5Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all these
commandments which I command thee this day.
6For the Lord thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many
nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shall
not reign over thee.
7If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine
hand from thy poor brother:
8But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his
need, in that which he wanteth.
9Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year
of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him
nought; and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.
10Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto
him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all
that thou puttest thine hand unto.
11For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.
12And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and
serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.
13And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:
14Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy
winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.
15And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord
thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day.
16And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee; because he loveth thee
and thine house, because he is well with thee;Deuteronomy 15
399Deuter onomy 15
17Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust itthrough his ear unto the door, and he shall be
thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.
18It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath
been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years: and the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all that thou doest.
19All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto
the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the
firstling of thy sheep.
20Thou shalt eat itbefore the Lord thy God year by year in the place which the Lord shall
choose, thou and thy household.
21And if there be anyblemish therein, as if it belame, or blind, or have any ill blemish, thou
shalt not sacrifice it unto the Lord thy God.
22Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean person shall eat italike, as the
roebuck, and as the hart.
23Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it upon the ground as water.
400Deuter onomy 15
Chapter 16
Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God: for in the
month of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.
2Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the Lord thy God, of the flock and the
herd, in the place which the Lord shall choose to place his name there.
3Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread
therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in
haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt
all the days of thy life.
4And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coast seven days; neither
shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all
night until the morning.
5Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God
giveth thee:
6But at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou camest
forth out of Egypt.
7And thou shalt roast and eat itin the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: and thou
shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents.
8Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day shall bea solemn assembly
to the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work therein.
9Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from such
time asthou beginnest to putthe sickle to the corn.
10And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a tribute of a freewill
offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord
thy God hath blessed thee:
11And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and
thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that iswithin thy gates, and the stranger,
and the fatherless, and the widow, that areamong you, in the place which the Lord thy God
hath chosen to place his name there.
12And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and
do these statutes.
13Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered
in thy corn and thy wine:
14And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant,
and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that
arewithin thy gates.Deuteronomy 16
401Deuter onomy 16
15Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God in the place which the
Lord shall choose: because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all
the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.
16Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place
which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty:
17Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he
hath given thee.
18Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God
giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.
19Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a
gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.
20That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee.
21Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the Lord thy God,
which thou shalt make thee.
22Neither shalt thou set thee up anyimage; which the Lord thy God hateth.
402Deuter onomy 16
Chapter 17
Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God anybullock, or sheep, wherein is blemish,
orany evilfavouredness: for that isan abomination unto the Lord thy God.
2If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the Lord thy God giveth
thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in
transgressing his covenant,
3And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the sun, or moon, or
any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded;
4And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it,and enquired diligently, and, behold, it be
true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel:
5Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked
thing, unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till
they die.
6At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put
to death; butat the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.
7The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the
hands of all the people. So thou shalt put the evil away from among you.
8If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between
plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates:
then shalt thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose;
9And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those
days, and enquire; and they shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:
10And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that place which the Lord shall
choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee:
11According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, tothe right hand, nor tothe left.
12And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest that
standeth to minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall
die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.
13And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
14When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt
possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations
that areabout me;
15Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: one
from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over
thee, which isnot thy brother.Deuteronomy 17
403Deuter onomy 17
16But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the
end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall
henceforth return no more that way.
17Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he
greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
18And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him
a copy of this law in a book out of that which isbefore the priests the Levites:
19And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn
to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them:
20That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the
commandment, tothe right hand, or tothe left: to the end that he may prolong hisdays in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.
404Deuter onomy 17
Chapter 18
The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with
Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and his inheritance.
2Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the Lord istheir inheritance,
as he hath said unto them.
3And this shall be the priest’s due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice,
whether it beox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two
cheeks, and the maw.
4The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy
sheep, shalt thou give him.
5For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name
of the Lord , him and his sons for ever.
6And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and
come with all the desire of his mind unto the place which the Lord shall choose;
7Then he shall minister in the name of the Lord his God, as all his brethren the Levites do,
which stand there before the Lord .
8They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.
9When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not
learn to do after the abominations of those nations.
10There shall not be found among you any onethat maketh his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire, or that useth divination, oran observer of times, or an enchanter, or a
witch,
11Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.
12For all that do these things arean abomination unto the Lord : and because of these abom-
inations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee.
13Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.
14For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto
diviners: but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.
15The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;
16According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the day of the as-
sembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this
great fire any more, that I die not.
17And the Lord said unto me, They have well spoken that which they have spoken.
18I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my
words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.Deuteronomy 18
405Deuter onomy 18
19And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall
speak in my name, I will require itof him.
20But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not
commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet
shall die.
21And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not
spoken?
22When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord , if the thing follow not, nor come to
pass, that isthe thing which the Lord hath not spoken, butthe prophet hath spoken it pre-
sumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.
406Deuter onomy 18
Chapter 19
When the Lord thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the Lord thy God giveth
thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;
2Thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the Lord thy God
giveth thee to possess it.
3Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the Lord thy God
giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither.
4And this isthe case of the slayer, which shall flee thither, that he may live: Whoso killeth
his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past;
5As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth
a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth
upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:
6Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him,
because the way is long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.
7Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three cities for thee.
8And if the Lord thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee
all the land which he promised to give unto thy fathers;
9If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do them, which I command thee this day,
to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more
for thee, beside these three:
10That innocent blood be not shed in thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee foran
inheritance, and soblood be upon thee.
11But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him,
and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:
12Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand
of the avenger of blood, that he may die.
13Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt ofinnocent blood from Israel,
that it may go well with thee.
14Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour’s landmark, which they of old time have set in
thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the Lord thy God giveth thee to
possess it.
15One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin
that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the
matter be established.
16If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which iswrong;Deuteronomy 19
407Deuter onomy 19
17Then both the men, between whom the controversy is,shall stand before the Lord , before
the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;
18And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, ifthe witness bea false witness,
and hath testified falsely against his brother;
19Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou
put the evil away from among you.
20And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any
such evil among you.
21And thine eye shall not pity; butlife shall gofor life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot.
408Deuter onomy 19
Chapter 20
When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and
a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God iswith thee, which
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
2And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and
speak unto the people,
3And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against your en-
emies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because
of them;
4For the Lord your God ishe that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to
save you.
5And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that hath built
a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man dedicate it.
6And what man is hethat hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yeteaten of it? let him also
go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.
7And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and
return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.
8And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, What man is there
that isfearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren’s
heart faint as well as his heart.
9And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they
shall make captains of the armies to lead the people.
10When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.
11And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that
all the people that isfound therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.
12And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt
besiege it:
13And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every
male thereof with the edge of the sword:
14But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies,
which the Lord thy God hath given thee.
15Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which arevery far off from thee, which arenot of
the cities of these nations.
16But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee foran inheritance,
thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:Deuteronomy 20
409Deuter onomy 20
17But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites,
and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded
thee:
18That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto
their gods; so should ye sin against the Lord your God.
19When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou
shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of
them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field isman’s life) to employ
them in the siege:
20Only the trees which thou knowest that they benot trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and
cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.
410Deuter onomy 20
Chapter 21
If onebe found slain in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying
in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him:
2Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities
which areround about him that is slain:
3And it shall be, that the city which isnext unto the slain man, even the elders of that city
shall take an heifer, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the
yoke;
4And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither
eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer’s neck there in the valley:
5And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the Lord thy God hath chosen
to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the Lord ; and by their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be tried:
6And all the elders of that city, that arenext unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over
the heifer that is beheaded in the valley:
7And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes
seen it.
8Be merciful, O Lord , unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent
blood unto thy people of Israel’s charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
9So shalt thou put away the guilt ofinnocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do
that which isright in the sight of the Lord .
10When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy God hath de-
livered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,
11And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou
wouldest have her to thy wife;
12Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave her head, and pare
her nails;
13And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine
house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in
unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.
14And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will;
but thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because
thou hast humbled her.
15If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him
children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated:Deuteronomy 21
411Deuter onomy 21
16Then it shall be, when he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not
make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indeed the first-
born:
17But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated forthe firstborn, by giving him a double
portion of all that he hath: for he isthe beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn
ishis.
18If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his
father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken
unto them:
19Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders
of his city, and unto the gate of his place;
20And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son isstubborn and rebellious, he
will not obey our voice; he isa glutton, and a drunkard.
21And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil
away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.
22And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and
thou hang him on a tree:
23His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that
day; (for he that is hanged isaccursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the Lord
thy God giveth thee foran inheritance.
412Deuter onomy 21
Chapter 22
Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them:
thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother.
2And if thy brother benot nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring
it unto thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou
shalt restore it to him again.
3In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with
all lost thing of thy brother’s, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise:
thou mayest not hide thyself.
4Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself
from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again.
5The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put
on a woman’s garment: for all that do so areabomination unto the Lord thy God.
6If a bird’s nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or on the ground,
whether they beyoung ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs,
thou shalt not take the dam with the young:
7Butthou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to thee; that it may be well
with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thydays.
8When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that
thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.
9Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit of thy seed which thou
hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled.
10Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.
11Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, asof woollen and linen together.
12Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou
coverest thyself.
13If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,
14And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I
took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid:
15Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens ofthe
damsel’s virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate:
16And the damsel’s father shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to
wife, and he hateth her;
17And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech against her, saying, I found not thy daughter
a maid; and yet these are the tokens ofmy daughter’s virginity. And they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.
18And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him;Deuteronomy 22
413Deuter onomy 22
19And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father
of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall
be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.
20But if this thing be true, and the tokens ofvirginity be not found for the damsel:
21Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father’s house, and the men of her
city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play
the whore in her father’s house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you.
22If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall both
of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away
evil from Israel.
23If a damsel that isa virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the
city, and lie with her;
24Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because
he hath humbled his neighbour’s wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.
25But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with
her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:
26But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there isin the damsel no sin worthy of death:
for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so isthis matter:
27For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save
her.
28If a man find a damsel that isa virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her,
and lie with her, and they be found;
29Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel’s father fifty shekels of silver,
and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.
30A man shall not take his father’s wife, nor discover his father’s skirt.
414Deuter onomy 22
Chapter 23
He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into
the congregation of the Lord .
2A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord ; even to his tenth generation
shall he not enter into the congregation of the Lord .
3An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord ; even to their
tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregation of the Lord for ever:
4Because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out
of Egypt; and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopot-
amia, to curse thee.
5Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the Lord thy God
turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee.
6Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days for ever.
7Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he isthy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian;
because thou wast a stranger in his land.
8The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the Lord in
their third generation.
9When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked
thing.
10If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth
him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:
11But it shall be, when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.
12Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:
13And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself
abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from
thee:
14For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up
thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.
15Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master
unto thee:
16He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of
thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.
17There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
18Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord
thy God for any vow: for even both these areabomination unto the Lord thy God.Deuteronomy 23
415Deuter onomy 23
19Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals,
usury of any thing that is lent upon usury:
20Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend
upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in
the land whither thou goest to possess it.
21When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for
the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.
22But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.
23That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform; even a freewill offering,
according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou hast promised with thy
mouth.
24When thou comest into thy neighbour’s vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy
fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put anyin thy vessel.
25When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the
ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour’s standing corn.
416Deuter onomy 23
Chapter 24
When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no
favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her
a bill of divorcement, and give itin her hand, and send her out of his house.
2And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man’s wife.
3And ifthe latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth itin her
hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be
his wife;
4Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that
she is defiled; for that isabomination before the Lord : and thou shalt not cause the land to
sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee foran inheritance.
5When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be
charged with any business: buthe shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife
which he hath taken.
6No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh a man’s
life to pledge.
7If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh
merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away
from among you.
8Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to
all that the priests the Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to
do.
9Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come
forth out of Egypt.
10When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch
his pledge.
11Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge
abroad unto thee.
12And if the man bepoor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
13In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may
sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the
Lord thy God.
14Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that ispoor and needy, whether he beof thy
brethren, or of thy strangers that arein thy land within thy gates:
15At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is
poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord , and it be sin unto
thee.Deuteronomy 24
417Deuter onomy 24
16The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to
death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
17Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, norof the fatherless; nor take a
widow’s raiment to pledge:
18But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the Lord thy God re-
deemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.
19When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field,
thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the
widow: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
20When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for
the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
21When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean itafterward: it shall
be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
22And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I
command thee to do this thing.
418Deuter onomy 24
Chapter 25
If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment, that the judges
may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.
2And it shall be, if the wicked man beworthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him
to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.
3Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, ifhe should exceed, and beat him above
these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.
4Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.
5If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead
shall not marry without unto a stranger: her husband’s brother shall go in unto her, and
take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s brother unto her.
6And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his
brother which isdead, that his name be not put out of Israel.
7And if the man like not to take his brother’s wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the
gate unto the elders, and say, My husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a
name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband’s brother.
8Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and ifhe stand to it,and say,
I like not to take her;
9Then shall his brother’s wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his
shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto
that man that will not build up his brother’s house.
10And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.
11When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for
to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand,
and taketh him by the secrets:
12Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.
13Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.
14Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.
15Butthou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have:
that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.
16For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, arean abomination unto the
Lord thy God.
17Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of
Egypt;
18How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.Deuteronomy 25
419Deuter onomy 25
19Therefore it shall be, when the Lord thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies
round about, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee foran inheritance to possess
it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.
420Deuter onomy 25
Chapter 26
And it shall be, when thou artcome in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth
thee foran inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein;
2That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy
land that the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt put itin a basket, and shalt go unto the
place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name there.
3And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess
this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the country which the Lord sware
unto our fathers for to give us.
4And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of
the Lord thy God.
5And thou shalt speak and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my
father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a
nation, great, mighty, and populous:
6And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:
7And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord heard our voice, and looked
on our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression:
8And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched
arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders:
9And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth
with milk and honey.
10And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O Lord , hast given
me. And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God:
11And thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee,
and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that isamong you.
12When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine increase the third year,
which isthe year of tithing, and hast given itunto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless,
and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled;
13Then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which thou hast com-
manded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them:
14I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any
unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead: butI have hearkened to the voice of the
Lord my God, and have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.
15Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the
land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that floweth with
milk and honey.Deuteronomy 26
421Deuter onomy 26
16This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments:
thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
17Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:
18And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;
19And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and
in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken.
422Deuter onomy 26
Chapter 27
And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the com-
mandments which I command you this day.
2And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the Lord thy
God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister:
3And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over, that
thou mayest go in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth
with milk and honey; as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee.
4Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which
I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.
5And there shalt thou build an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt
not lift up anyiron tool upon them.
6Thou shalt build the altar of the Lord thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt offer burnt
offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God:
7And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and rejoice before the Lord thy
God.
8And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.
9And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and
hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.
10Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his commandments and
his statutes, which I command thee this day.
11And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,
12These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan;
Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:
13And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun,
Dan, and Naphtali.
14And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,
15Cursed bethe man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the
Lord , the work of the hands of the craftsman, and putteth itin asecret place. And all the
people shall answer and say, Amen.
16Cursed behe that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all the people shall say,
Amen.
17Cursed behe that removeth his neighbour’s landmark. And all the people shall say, Amen.
18Cursed behe that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say,
Amen.
19Cursed behe that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And all
the people shall say, Amen.Deuteronomy 27
423Deuter onomy 27
20Cursed behe that lieth with his father’s wife; because he uncovereth his father’s skirt. And
all the people shall say, Amen.
21Cursed behe that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.
22Cursed behe that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his
mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
23Cursed behe that lieth with his mother in law. And all the people shall say, Amen.
24Cursed behe that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the people shall say, Amen.
25Cursed behe that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say,
Amen.
26Cursed behe that confirmeth not allthe words of this law to do them. And all the people
shall say, Amen.
424Deuter onomy 27
Chapter 28
And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the
Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:
2And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto
the voice of the Lord thy God.
3Blessed shalt thou bein the city, and blessed shalt thou bein the field.
4Blessed shall bethe fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle,
the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
5Blessed shall bethy basket and thy store.
6Blessed shalt thou bewhen thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou bewhen thou goest out.
7The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face:
they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.
8The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou
settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth
thee.
9The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if
thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.
10And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the Lord ; and they
shall be afraid of thee.
11And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit
of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers
to give thee.
12The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land
in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations,
and thou shalt not borrow.
13And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and
thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the Lord thy
God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do them:
14And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the
right hand, or tothe left, to go after other gods to serve them.
15But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day;
that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:
16Cursed shalt thou bein the city, and cursed shalt thou bein the field.
17Cursed shall bethy basket and thy store.Deuteronomy 28
425Deuter onomy 28
18Cursed shall bethe fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine,
and the flocks of thy sheep.
19Cursed shalt thou bewhen thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou bewhen thou goest out.
20The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine
hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the
wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.
21The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from
off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.
22The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation,
and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and
they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
23And thy heaven that isover thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall
beiron.
24The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come
down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
25The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way
against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms
of the earth.
26And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth,
and no man shall fray them away.
27The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the
scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.
28The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:
29And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not
prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man
shall save thee.
30Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house,
and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes
thereof.
31Thine ox shall beslain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be
violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall
begiven unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.
32Thy sons and thy daughters shall begiven unto another people, and thine eyes shall look,
and fail with longing for them all the day long: and there shall beno might in thine hand.
33The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up;
and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway:
34So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
426Deuter onomy 28
35The Lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be
healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.
36The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which
neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and
stone.
37And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations
whither the Lord shall lead thee.
38Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather butlittle in; for the locust
shall consume it.
39Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither drink ofthe wine, nor gather
the grapes; for the worms shall eat them.
40Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with
the oil; for thine olive shall cast his fruit.
41Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shall go into
captivity.
42All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.
43The stranger that iswithin thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shalt come
down very low.
44He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt
be the tail.
45Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee,
till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:
46And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.
47Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart,
for the abundance of all things;
48Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger,
and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron
upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.
49The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as
the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand;
50A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew
favour to the young:
51And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed:
which also shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, orthe increase of thy kine, or flocks
of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.
427Deuter onomy 28
52And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down,
wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates
throughout all thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee.
53And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters,
which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine
enemies shall distress thee:
54So that the man that istender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward
his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which
he shall leave:
55So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because
he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee in all thy gates.
56The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of
her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the
husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
57And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children
which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and
straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.
58If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that
thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, THE Lord THY GOD;
59Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great
plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.
60Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and
they shall cleave unto thee.
61Also every sickness, and every plague, which isnot written in the book of this law, them
will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
62And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude;
because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God.
63And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply
you; so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye
shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it.
64And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto
the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, even wood and stone.
65And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have
rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of
mind:
428Deuter onomy 28
66And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt
have none assurance of thy life:
67In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would
God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight
of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
68And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake
unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for
bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.
429Deuter onomy 28
Chapter 29
These arethe words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with
the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them
in Horeb.
2And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have seen all that the Lord
did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto
all his land;
3The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles:
4Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear,
unto this day.
5And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old upon you,
and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot.
6Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink: that ye might know
that I amthe Lord your God.
7And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan,
came out against us unto battle, and we smote them:
8And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the
Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.
9Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye
do.
10Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God; your captains of your tribes,
your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel,
11Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that isin thy camp, from the hewer of thy
wood unto the drawer of thy water:
12That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which
the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day:
13That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee
a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.
14Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;
15But with him that standeth here with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with
him that isnot here with us this day:
16(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the na-
tions which ye passed by;
17And ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold,
which were among them:)Deuteronomy 29
430Deuter onomy 29
18Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth
away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there
should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;
19And it come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst:
20The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the
Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.
21And the Lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all
the curses of the covenant that are written in this book of the law:
22So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger
that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the
sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it;
23And that the whole land thereof isbrimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown,
nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah,
Admah, and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:
24Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what meaneth
the heat of this great anger?
25Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt:
26For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not,
and whom he had not given unto them:
27And the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curses
that are written in this book:
28And the Lord rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation,
and cast them into another land, as it isthis day.
29The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed belong
unto us and to our children for ever, that wemay do all the words of this law.
431Deuter onomy 29
Chapter 30
And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and
the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations,
whither the Lord thy God hath driven thee,
2And shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and shalt obey his voice according to all that I
command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;
3That then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and
will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath scattered
thee.
4If anyof thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord
thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee:
5And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou
shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
6And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.
7And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate
thee, which persecuted thee.
8And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the Lord , and do all his commandments which
I command thee this day.
9And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit
of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the Lord
will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers:
10If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and
his statutes which are written in this book of the law, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
11For this commandment which I command thee this day, it isnot hidden from thee,
neither isit far off.
12It isnot in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring
it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
13Neither isit beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
14But the word isvery nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do
it.
15See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;
16In that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep
his commandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply:
and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.Deuteronomy 30
432Deuter onomy 30
17But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and
worship other gods, and serve them;
18I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong
your days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.
19I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and
death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:
20That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that
thou mayest cleave unto him: for he isthy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest
dwell in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob,
to give them.
433Deuter onomy 30
Chapter 31
And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.
2And he said unto them, I aman hundred and twenty years old this day; I can no more go
out and come in: also the Lord hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
3The Lord thy God, he will go over before thee, andhe will destroy these nations from before
thee, and thou shalt possess them: and Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the Lord hath
said.
4And the Lord shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and
unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.
5And the Lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do unto them according
unto all the commandments which I have commanded you.
6Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord thy God, he
it isthat doth go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
7And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong
and of a good courage: for thou must go with this people unto the land which the Lord hath
sworn unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.
8And the Lord , he it isthat doth go before thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee,
neither forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed.
9And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which
bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord , and unto all the elders of Israel.
10And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity
of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
11When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall
choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
12Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that is
within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God,
and observe to do all the words of this law:
13And that their children, which have not known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the
Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
14And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die: call
Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a
charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.
15And the Lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar of the cloud
stood over the door of the tabernacle.
16And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this
people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, whither theyDeuteronomy 31
434Deuter onomy 31
go to beamong them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with
them.
17Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I
will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our
God isnot among us?
18And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils which they shall have wrought,
in that they are turned unto other gods.
19Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their
mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.
20For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that
floweth with milk and honey; and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen
fat; then will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.
21And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are befallen them, that this song
shall testify against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their
seed: for I know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have brought
them into the land which I sware.
22Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of Israel.
23And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong and of a good courage:
for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I will
be with thee.
24And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law
in a book, until they were finished,
25That Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord , saying,
26Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your
God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.
27For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day,
ye have been rebellious against the Lord ; and how much more after my death?
28Gather unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these
words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.
29For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the
way which I have commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will
do evil in the sight of the Lord , to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.
30And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until
they were ended.
435Deuter onomy 31
Chapter 32
Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
2My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon
the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass:
3Because I will publish the name of the Lord : ascribe ye greatness unto our God.
4He isthe Rock, his work isperfect: for all his ways arejudgment: a God of truth and without
iniquity, just and right ishe.
5They have corrupted themselves, their spot isnot the spot of his children: they area perverse
and crooked generation.
6Do ye thus requite the Lord , O foolish people and unwise? isnot he thy father that hath
bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee?
7Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and
he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.
8When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons
of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.
9For the Lord ’S portion ishis people; Jacob isthe lot of his inheritance.
10He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he led him about, he
instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.
11As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings,
taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
12Sothe Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.
13He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the
fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;
14Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.
15But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the
Rock of his salvation.
16They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him
to anger.
17They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that
came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.
18Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.
19And when the Lord saw it,he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and
of his daughters.
20And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be:for they are
a very froward generation, children in whom isno faith.Deuteronomy 32
436Deuter onomy 32
21They have moved me to jealousy with that which isnot God; they have provoked me to
anger with their vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those which arenot a people;
I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
22For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume
the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.
23I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.
24They shall beburnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruc-
tion: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.
25The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin,
the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.
26I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease
from among men:
27Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, andlest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done
all this.
28For they area nation void of counsel, neither is there anyunderstanding in them.
29O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
30How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock
had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?
31For their rock isnot as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.
32For their vine isof the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are
grapes of gall, their clusters arebitter:
33Their wine isthe poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.
34Isnot this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?
35To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time: for the
day of their calamity isat hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.
36For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth
that their power is gone, and there isnone shut up, or left.
37And he shall say, Where aretheir gods, their rock in whom they trusted,
38Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let
them rise up and help you, and be your protection.
39See now that I, even I, amhe, and there isno god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound,
and I heal: neither is there anythat can deliver out of my hand.
40For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.
41If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render ven-
geance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.
437Deuter onomy 32
42I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that
with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the
enemy.
43Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and
will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, andto his people.
44And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he,
and Hoshea the son of Nun.
45And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
46And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this
day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.
47For it isnot a vain thing for you; because it isyour life: and through this thing ye shall
prolong your days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
48And the Lord spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying,
49Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which isin the land of Moab,
that isover against Jericho; and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children
of Israel for a possession:
50And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron
thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:
51Because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-
Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children
of Israel.
52Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which
I give the children of Israel.
438Deuter onomy 32
Chapter 33
And this isthe blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel
before his death.
2And he said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth
from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a
fiery law for them.
3Yea, he loved the people; all his saints arein thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; every
oneshall receive of thy words.
4Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.
5And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were
gathered together.
6Let Reuben live, and not die; and let nothis men be few.
7And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, Lord , the voice of Judah, and bring
him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from
his enemies.
8And of Levi he said, Letthy Thummim and thy Urim bewith thy holy one, whom thou
didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;
9Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge
his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy
covenant.
10They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before
thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.
11Bless, Lord , his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the loins of
them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.
12And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and
the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.
13And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord behis land, for the precious things of
heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,
14And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth
by the moon,
15And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting
hills,
16And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and forthe good will of him
that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of
the head of him that was separated from his brethren.Deuteronomy 33
439Deuter onomy 33
17His glory is likethe firstling of his bullock, and his horns are likethe horns of unicorns:
with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they arethe ten
thousands of Ephraim, and they arethe thousands of Manasseh.
18And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents.
19They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteous-
ness: for they shall suck ofthe abundance of the seas, and oftreasures hid in the sand.
20And of Gad he said, Blessed behe that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth
the arm with the crown of the head.
21And he provided the first part for himself, because there, ina portion of the lawgiver, was
heseated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord , and
his judgments with Israel.
22And of Dan he said, Dan isa lion’s whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.
23And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing
of the Lord : possess thou the west and the south.
24And of Asher he said, LetAsher beblessed with children; let him be acceptable to his
brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.
25Thy shoes shall beiron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
26There isnone like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help,
and in his excellency on the sky.
27The eternal God is thyrefuge, and underneath arethe everlasting arms: and he shall thrust
out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.
28Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob shall beupon a land of corn
and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.
29Happy artthou, O Israel: who islike unto thee, O people saved by the Lord , the shield of
thy help, and who isthe sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars
unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.
440Deuter onomy 33
Chapter 34
And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of
Pisgah, that isover against Jericho. And the Lord shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto
Dan,
2And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto
the utmost sea,
3And the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.
4And the Lord said unto him, This isthe land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and
unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see itwith thine eyes,
but thou shalt not go over thither.
5So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab, according to the word
of the Lord .
6And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Bethpeor: but no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.
7And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim,
nor his natural force abated.
8And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days
of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
9And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his
hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord com-
manded Moses.
10And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face,
11In all the signs and the wonders, which the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt to
Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
12And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed in the sight
of all Israel.Deuteronomy 34
441Deuter onomy 34
The Book of
JoshuaJoshua
442Joshua
Chapter 1
Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord spake
unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying,
2Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people,
unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel.
3Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said
unto Moses.
4From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all
the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be
your coast.
5There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with
Moses, soI will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
6Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance
the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.
7Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all
the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it tothe right hand or to
the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest.
8This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day
and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then
thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.
9Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be
thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God iswith thee whithersoever thou goest.
10Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,
11Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within
three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the Lord your
God giveth you to possess it.
12And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, spake
Joshua, saying,
13Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, saying, The
Lord your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.
14Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave
you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men
of valour, and help them;
15Until the Lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you, and they also have
possessed the land which the Lord your God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land
of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the Lord ’S servant gave you on this side Jordan
toward the sunrising.Joshua 1
443Joshua 1
16And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.
17According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only
the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
18Whosoever he bethat doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto
thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of
a good courage.
444Joshua 1
Chapter 2
And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view
the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot’s house, named Rahab, and
lodged there.
2And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of
the children of Israel to search out the country.
3And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee,
which are entered into thine house: for they be come to search out all the country.
4And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto
me, but I wist not whence they were:
5And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men
went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake
them.
6But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax,
which she had laid in order upon the roof.
7And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as soon as they
which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.
8And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;
9And she said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the land, and that your
terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.
10For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came
out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other
side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
11And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain
any more courage in any man, because of you: for the Lord your God, he isGod in heaven
above, and in earth beneath.
12Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord , since I have shewed you kindness,
that ye will also shew kindness unto my father’s house, and give me a true token:
13And that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters,
and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.
14And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our business. And it
shall be, when the Lord hath given us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
15Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house wasupon the town
wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
16And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide
yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your
way.Joshua 2
445Joshua 2
17And the men said unto her, We will beblameless of this thine oath which thou hast made
us swear.
18Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the
window which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother,
and thy brethren, and all thy father’s household, home unto thee.
19And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his
blood shall beupon his head, and we will beguiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in
the house, his blood shall beon our head, if anyhand be upon him.
20And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine oath which thou hast
made us to swear.
21And she said, According unto your words, so beit. And she sent them away, and they
departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window.
22And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers
were returned: and the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but found them not.
23So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and
came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all things that befell them:
24And they said unto Joshua, Truly the Lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for
even all the inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.
446Joshua 2
Chapter 3
And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to
Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.
2And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the host;
3And they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the Lord
your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and
go after it.
4Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come
not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed this
way heretofore.
5And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the Lord will do
wonders among you.
6And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over
before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people.
7And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all
Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.
8And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye
are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.
9And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the
Lord your God.
10And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God isamong you, and that he will
without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and
the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.
11Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into
Jordan.
12Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.
13And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of
the Lord , the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan
shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an
heap.
14And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan,
and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;
15And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare
the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest,)
16That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far
from the city Adam, that isbeside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of theJoshua 3
447Joshua 3
plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against
Jericho.
17And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in
the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people
were passed clean over Jordan.
448Joshua 3
Chapter 4
And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord
spake unto Joshua, saying,
2Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
3And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place
where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and
leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.
4Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out
of every tribe a man:
5And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst
of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the
number of the tribes of the children of Israel:
6That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to
come, saying, What mean ye by these stones?
7Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the
covenant of the Lord ; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and
these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.
8And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of
the midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes
of the children of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged,
and laid them down there.
9And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the
priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this day.
10For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was
finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that
Moses commanded Joshua: and the people hasted and passed over.
11And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the Lord
passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.
12And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh,
passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them:
13About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the Lord unto battle, to the
plains of Jericho.
14On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him,
as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.
15And the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,
16Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan.
17Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan.Joshua 4
449Joshua 4
18And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord were
come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up unto the
dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his banks,
as they didbefore.
19And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and en-
camped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.
20And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.
21And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones?
22Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
23For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed
over, as the Lord your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we
were gone over:
24That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord , that it ismighty: that
ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.
450Joshua 4
Chapter 5
And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan
westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the Lord
had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were passed
over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the
children of Israel.
2At that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again
the children of Israel the second time.
3And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hill of
the foreskins.
4And this isthe cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that came out of Egypt,
that were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came
out of Egypt.
5Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people that were born in
the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.
6For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the people that were
men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice
of the Lord : unto whom the Lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
Lord sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey.
7And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for they
were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.
8And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people, that they abode in
their places in the camp, till they were whole.
9And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off
you. Wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day.
10And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the fourteenth
day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.
11And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened
cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.
12And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land;
neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land
of Canaan that year.
13And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked,
and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and
Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Artthou for us, or for our adversaries?
14And he said, Nay; but ascaptain of the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua
fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto
his servant?Joshua 5
451Joshua 5
15And the captain of the Lord ’S host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest isholy. And Joshua did so.
452Joshua 5
Chapter 6
Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and
none came in.
2And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king
thereof, and the mighty men of valour.
3And ye shall compass the city, all yemen of war, and go round about the city once. Thus
shalt thou do six days.
4And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams' horns: and the seventh
day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.
5And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when
ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall
of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before him.
6And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of
the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the
Lord .
7And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let him that is armed pass
on before the ark of the Lord .
8And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests
bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns passed on before the Lord , and blew with the
trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord followed them.
9And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the
rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
10And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise
with your voice, neither shall anyword proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you
shout; then shall ye shout.
11So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going about itonce: and they came into the
camp, and lodged in the camp.
12And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the Lord .
13And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord went
on continually, and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the
rereward came after the ark of the Lord , the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
14And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp: so they
did six days.
15And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day,
and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed
the city seven times.Joshua 6
453Joshua 6
16And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua
said unto the people, Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city.
17And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that aretherein, to the Lord : only Rahab
the harlot shall live, she and all that arewith her in the house, because she hid the messengers
that we sent.
18And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make yourselves ac-
cursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble
it.
19But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, areconsecrated unto the Lord :
they shall come into the treasury of the Lord .
20So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when
the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that
the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before
him, and they took the city.
21And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old,
and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.
22But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot’s
house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.
23And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and
her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred,
and left them without the camp of Israel.
24And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the silver, and the gold,
and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the Lord .
25And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father’s household, and all that she had;
and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua
sent to spy out Jericho.
26And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed bethe man before the Lord , that
riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn,
and in his youngest sonshall he set up the gates of it.
27So the Lord was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all the country.
454Joshua 6
Chapter 7
But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the
son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed
thing: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel.
2And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which isbeside Bethaven, on the east side of
Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up
and viewed Ai.
3And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let about
two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour
thither; for they are butfew.
4So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men: and they fled before the
men of Ai.
5And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from
before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts
of the people melted, and became as water.
6And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the
Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.
7And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord GOD, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over
Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had
been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!
8O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies!
9For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it,and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?
10And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?
11Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded
them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled
also, and they have put iteven among their own stuff.
12Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, butturned their
backs before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more,
except ye destroy the accursed from among you.
13Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for thus saith the
Lord God of Israel, There isan accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not
stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.
14In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes: and it shall be, that
the tribe which the Lord taketh shall come according to the families thereof; and the family
which the Lord shall take shall come by households; and the household which the Lord shall
take shall come man by man.Joshua 7
455Joshua 7
15And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he
and all that he hath: because he hath transgressed the covenant of the Lord , and because he
hath wrought folly in Israel.
16So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the
tribe of Judah was taken:
17And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought
the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
18And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of
Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
19And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel,
and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide itnot from me.
20And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel,
and thus and thus have I done:
21When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of
silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and,
behold, they arehid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.
22So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his
tent, and the silver under it.
23And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto
all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the Lord .
24And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the
garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses,
and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
Achor.
25And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. And all
Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with
stones.
26And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord turned from
the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The valley of Achor,
unto this day.
456Joshua 7
Chapter 8
And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people
of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and
his people, and his city, and his land:
2And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil
thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it.
3So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out
thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night.
4And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, even behind
the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready:
5And I, and all the people that arewith me, will approach unto the city: and it shall come
to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them,
6(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the city; for they will say,
They flee before us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.
7Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the Lord your God will
deliver it into your hand.
8And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set the city on fire: according to
the commandment of the Lord shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.
9Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between
Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
10And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and
the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
11And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh,
and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now there wasa valley between
them and Ai.
12And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush between Bethel and
Ai, on the west side of the city.
13And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on the north of the city, and
their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.
14And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it,that they hasted and rose up early,
and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time ap-
pointed, before the plain; but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind
the city.
15And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of
the wilderness.Joshua 8
457Joshua 8
16And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after them: and they
pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.
17And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out after Israel: and they left
the city open, and pursued after Israel.
18And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that isin thy hand toward Ai; for I
will give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that he hadin his hand toward
the city.
19And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched
out his hand: and they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.
20And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the
city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the
people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
21And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke
of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.
22And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some
on this side, and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain
or escape.
23And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.
24And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in
the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the
edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and
smote it with the edge of the sword.
25And soit was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand,
even all the men of Ai.
26For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had
utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
27Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according
unto the word of the Lord which he commanded Joshua.
28And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation unto this day.
29And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down,
Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the
entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto
this day.
30Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount Ebal,
31As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the
book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up anyiron:
and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the Lord , and sacrificed peace offerings.
458Joshua 8
32And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in
the presence of the children of Israel.
33And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark
and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
Lord , as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount
Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the Lord had
commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.
34And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to
all that is written in the book of the law.
35There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the
congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were
conversant among them.
459Joshua 8
Chapter 9
And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hills, and
in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the
Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;
2That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.
3And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to
Ai,
4They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old
sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;
5And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy.
6And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of
Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make ye a league with us.
7And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how
shall we make a league with you?
8And they said unto Joshua, We arethy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who areye?
and from whence come ye?
9And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the
name of the Lord thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
10And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon
king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth.
11Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take
victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, We areyour
servants: therefore now make ye a league with us.
12This our bread we took hot forour provision out of our houses on the day we came forth
to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:
13And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these
our garments and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.
14And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord .
15And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and
the princes of the congregation sware unto them.
16And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a league with them,
that they heard that they were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them.
17And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now
their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.Joshua 9
460Joshua 9
18And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had
sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against
the princes.
19But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord
God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them.
20This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the
oath which we sware unto them.
21And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be hewers of wood and
drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the princes had promised them.
22And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye be-
guiled us, saying, We arevery far from you; when ye dwell among us?
23Now therefore ye arecursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen,
and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.
24And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that
the Lord thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all
the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because
of you, and have done this thing.
25And now, behold, we arein thine hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto
us, do.
26And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel,
that they slew them not.
27And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation,
and for the altar of the Lord , even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.
461Joshua 9
Chapter 10
Now it came to pass, when Adonizedek king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had
taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had
done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel,
and were among them;
2That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and
because it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty.
3Wherefore Adonizedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto
Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon,
saying,
4Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with
Joshua and with the children of Israel.
5Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the
king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and
went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.
6And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy
hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for all the kings of
the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us.
7So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty
men of valour.
8And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine
hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.
9Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night.
10And the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at
Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up to Bethhoron, and smote them to
Azekah, and unto Makkedah.
11And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Beth-
horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they
died: they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword.
12Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites
before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.
13And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves
upon their enemies. Isnot this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the
midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.
14And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice
of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.Joshua 10
462Joshua 10
15And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
16But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.
17And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.
18And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to
keep them:
19And stay ye not, butpursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer
them not to enter into their cities: for the Lord your God hath delivered them into your
hand.
20And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying
them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of
them entered into fenced cities.
21And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved
his tongue against any of the children of Israel.
22Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me
out of the cave.
23And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of
Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of
Eglon.
24And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called
for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him,
Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their
feet upon the necks of them.
25And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage:
for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
26And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and
they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
27And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded,
and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been
hid, and laid great stones in the cave’s mouth, which remain until this very day.
28And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none
remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.
29Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought
against Libnah:
30And the Lord delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote
it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it;
but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.
463Joshua 10
31And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped
against it, and fought against it:
32And the Lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, according to all
that he had done to Libnah.
33Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his
people, until he had left him none remaining.
34And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they en-
camped against it, and fought against it:
35And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.
36And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought
against it:
37And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all
the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to
all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.
38And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:
39And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with
the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none re-
maining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had
done also to Libnah, and to her king.
40So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of
the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed,
as the Lord God of Israel commanded.
41And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen,
even unto Gibeon.
42And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the Lord God of
Israel fought for Israel.
43And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
464Joshua 10
Chapter 11
And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to
Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
2And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of
Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,
3And tothe Canaanite on the east and on the west, and tothe Amorite, and the Hittite, and
the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and tothe Hivite under Hermon in the
land of Mizpeh.
4And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that
isupon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.
5And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters
of Merom, to fight against Israel.
6And the Lord said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about
this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and
burn their chariots with fire.
7So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom
suddenly; and they fell upon them.
8And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them
unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and
they smote them, until they left them none remaining.
9And Joshua did unto them as the Lord bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their
chariots with fire.
10And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof
with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.
11And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying
them: there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.
12And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote
them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the
Lord commanded.
13But as forthe cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save
Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.
14And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto
themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed
them, neither left they any to breathe.
15As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so
did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the Lord commanded Moses.Joshua 11
465Joshua 11
16So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen,
and the valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;
17Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the valley of Le-
banon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.
18Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
19There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the in-
habitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle.
20For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle,
that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might
destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses.
21And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from
Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the
mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.
22There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in
Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.
23So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the Lord said unto Moses; and Joshua
gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the
land rested from war.
466Joshua 11
Chapter 12
Now these arethe kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed
their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto
mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:
2Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which isupon
the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even
unto the river Jabbok, which isthe border of the children of Ammon;
3And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, even
the salt sea on the east, the way to Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah:
4And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which wasof the remnant of the giants, that dwelt
at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
5And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the
Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
6Them did Moses the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the
servant of the Lord gave it fora possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the
half tribe of Manasseh.
7And these arethe kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote
on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount
Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel fora possession ac-
cording to their divisions;
8In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wil-
derness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Per-
izzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites:
9The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which isbeside Bethel, one;
10The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
11The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
12The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
13The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
14The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
15The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
16The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
17The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
18The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;
19The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
20The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
21The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
22The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;Joshua 12
467Joshua 12
23The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;
24The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.
468Joshua 12
Chapter 13
Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the Lord said unto him, Thou art old
and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.
2This isthe land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,
3From Sihor, which isbefore Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is
counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites,
the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
4From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that isbeside the Sidonians,
unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:
5And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baalgad under
mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.
6All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and all the
Sidonians, them will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot
unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.
7Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe
of Manasseh,
8With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses
gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the Lord gave them;
9From Aroer, that isupon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that isin the midst of
the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;
10And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the
border of the children of Ammon;
11And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon,
and all Bashan unto Salcah;
12All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained
of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.
13Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but
the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.
14Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel
made by fire aretheir inheritance, as he said unto them.
15And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance according to
their families.
16And their coast was from Aroer, that ison the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that
isin the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;
17Heshbon, and all her cities that arein the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Beth-Baal-
meon,
18And Jahaza, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,Joshua 13
469Joshua 13
19And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley,
20And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth,
21And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which
reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and
Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.
22Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the
sword among them that were slain by them.
23And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border thereof. This was
the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the villages
thereof.
24And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad according
to their families.
25And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of
Ammon, unto Aroer that isbefore Rabbah;
26And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the
border of Debir;
27And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and hisborder, even unto the edge of the sea of
Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
28This isthe inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.
29And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and thiswas the possession
of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.
30And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan,
and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, threescore cities:
31And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were
pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families.
32These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab,
on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.
33But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not anyinheritance: the Lord God of Israel wastheir
inheritance, as he said unto them.
470Joshua 13
Chapter 14
And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan,
which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the
tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.
2By lot was their inheritance, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine
tribes, and forthe half tribe.
3For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan:
but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.
4For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no
part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in,with their suburbs for their cattle
and for their substance.
5As the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land.
6Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh
the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the Lord said unto Moses the man
of God concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.
7Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from Kadeshbarnea to
espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in mine heart.
8Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I
wholly followed the Lord my God.
9And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall
be thine inheritance, and thy children’s for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the Lord
my God.
10And now, behold, the Lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even
since the Lord spake this word unto Moses, while the children ofIsrael wandered in the
wilderness: and now, lo, I amthis day fourscore and five years old.
11As yet I am asstrong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was
then, even so ismy strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.
12Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the Lord spake in that day; for thou
heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that the cities were great and fenced:
if so be the Lord will bewith me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the Lord said.
13And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inher-
itance.
14Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite
unto this day, because that he wholly followed the Lord God of Israel.
15And the name of Hebron before wasKirjatharba; which Arba wasa great man among the
Anakims. And the land had rest from war.Joshua 14
471Joshua 14
Chapter 15
This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the
border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.
2And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh
southward:
3And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended
up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar,
and fetched a compass to Karkaa:
4From thence it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings
out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.
5And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan. And their border in the
north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan:
6And the border went up to Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and
the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:
7And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking
toward Gilgal, that isbefore the going up to Adummim, which ison the south side of the
river: and the border passed toward the waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof
were at Enrogel:
8And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of the Je-
busite; the same isJerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth
before the valley of Hinnom westward, which isat the end of the valley of the giants north-
ward:
9And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the water of
Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah,
which isKirjathjearim:
10And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along
unto the side of mount Jearim, which isChesalon, on the north side, and went down to
Beth- shemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
11And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn
to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings
out of the border were at the sea.
12And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This isthe coast of the
children of Judah round about according to their families.
13And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah,
according to the commandment of the Lord to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of
Anak, which city isHebron.
14And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the
children of Anak.Joshua 15
472Joshua 15
15And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was
Kirjath- sepher.
16And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah
my daughter to wife.
17And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his
daughter to wife.
18And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field:
and she lighted off herass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou?
19Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also
springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.
20This isthe inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.
21And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom
southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
22And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
23And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
24Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,
25And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which isHazor,
26Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
27And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
28And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah,
29Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,
30And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,
31And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
32And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities aretwenty and nine, with
their villages:
33And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
34And Zanoah, and En- gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,
35Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,
36And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their
villages:
37Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,
38And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,
39Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
40And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
41And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages:
42Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
43And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
473Joshua 15
44And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages:
45Ekron, with her towns and her villages:
46From Ekron even unto the sea, all that laynear Ashdod, with their villages:
47Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the
river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof:
48And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,
49And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which isDebir,
50And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
51And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:
52Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,
53And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,
54And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which isHebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:
55Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,
56And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
57Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:
58Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor,
59And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:
60Kirjathbaal, which isKirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:
61In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,
62And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.
63As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive
them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.
474Joshua 15
Chapter 16
And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of
Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel,
2And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
3And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Bethhoron the nether,
and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.
4So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
5And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even
the border of their inheritance on the east side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;
6And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border
went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
7And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went
out at Jordan.
8The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out
thereof were at the sea. This isthe inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by
their families.
9And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the inheritance of the
children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
10And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell
among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.Joshua 16
475Joshua 16
Chapter 17
There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he wasthe firstborn of Joseph; to wit,
for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war,
therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
2There was also a lotfor the rest of the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children
of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children
of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were
the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.
3But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these arethe names of his daughters, Mahlah,
and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
4And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before
the princes, saying, The Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our
brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.
5And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which were
on the other side Jordan;
6Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of
Manasseh’s sons had the land of Gilead.
7And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem;
and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.
8Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged
to the children of Ephraim;
9And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Eph-
raim areamong the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also was on the north side of
the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:
10Southward it was Ephraim’s, and northward it was Manasseh’s, and the sea is his border;
and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.
11And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her towns, and Ibleam and
her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and
her towns, even three countries.
12Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants ofthose cities; but the
Canaanites would dwell in that land.
13Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the
Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them out.Joshua 17
476Joshua 17
14And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me butone
lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I ama great people, forasmuch as the Lord hath blessed
me hitherto?
15And Joshua answered them, If thou bea great people, then get thee up to the wood country,
and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim
be too narrow for thee.
16And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that
dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who areof Bethshean and her
towns, and they who areof the valley of Jezreel.
17And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying,
Thou arta great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot only:
18But the mountain shall be thine; for it isa wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the out-
goings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron
chariots, and though they bestrong.
477Joshua 17
Chapter 18
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and
set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.
2And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received
their inheritance.
3And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long areye slack to go to possess the land,
which the Lord God of your fathers hath given you?
4Give out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send them, and they shall
rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.
5And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and
the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.
6Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me,
that I may cast lots for you here before the Lord our God.
7But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance:
and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond
Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them.
8And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe
the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that
I may here cast lots for you before the Lord in Shiloh.
9And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts
in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.
10And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord : and there Joshua divided the
land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.
11And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families:
and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of
Joseph.
12And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side
of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings
out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.
13And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Bethel,
southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south
side of the nether Bethhoron.
14And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from
the hill that lieth before Beth- horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjath-
baal, which isKirjath- jearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.
15And the south quarter wasfrom the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the
west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:Joshua 18
478Joshua 18
16And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the
son of Hinnom, and which isin the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the
valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
17And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward
Geliloth, which isover against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of
Bohan the son of Reuben,
18And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto
Arabah:
19And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of
the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this wasthe south
coast.
20And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children
of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.
21Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were
Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,
22And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel,
23And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,
24And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:
25Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,
26And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
27And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
28And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which isJerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities
with their villages. This isthe inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their
families.
479Joshua 18
Chapter 19
And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon
according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children
of Judah.
2And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,
3And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem,
4And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,
5And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,
6And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:
7Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:
8And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
9Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon:
for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon
had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.
10And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and
the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
11And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and
reached to the river that isbefore Jokneam;
12And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor,
and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,
13And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth
out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
14And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof
are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
15And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with
their villages.
16This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities
with their villages.
17And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to their
families.
18And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
19And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,
20And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
21And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
22And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings
of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.Joshua 19
480Joshua 19
23This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families,
the cities and their villages.
24And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their
families.
25And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
26And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to
Shihorlibnath;
27And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the
valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul
on the left hand,
28And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon;
29And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth
to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib:
30Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
31This isthe inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families,
these cities with their villages.
32The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali
according to their families.
33And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and
Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
34And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to
Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side,
and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
35And the fenced cities areZiddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
36And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,
37And Kedesh, and Edrei, and Enhazor,
38And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with
their villages.
39This isthe inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families,
the cities and their villages.
40And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their
families.
41And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Irshemesh,
42And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,
43And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,
44And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,
45And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,
46And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.
481Joshua 19
47And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children
of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword,
and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their
father.
48This isthe inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these
cities with their villages.
49When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the
children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:
50According to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-
serah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.
51These arethe inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the
heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot
in Shiloh before the Lord , at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made
an end of dividing the country.
482Joshua 19
Chapter 20
The Lord also spake unto Joshua, saying,
2Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake
unto you by the hand of Moses:
3That the slayer that killeth anyperson unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they
shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.
4And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate
of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take
him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
5And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into
his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.
6And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and
until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and
come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.
7And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount
Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which isHebron, in the mountain of Judah.
8And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness
upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad,
and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
9These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that so-
journeth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither,
and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.Joshua 20
483Joshua 20
Chapter 21
Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto
Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;
2And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The Lord commanded
by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.
3And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the command-
ment of the Lord , these cities and their suburbs.
4And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the
priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of
Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.
5And the rest of the children of Kohath hadby lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim,
and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.
6And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out
of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh
in Bashan, thirteen cities.
7The children of Merari by their families hadout of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe
of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
8And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as
the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
9And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the
children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,
10Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the
children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.
11And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city isHebron, in the hill
country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.
12But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh
for his possession.
13Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, to bea
city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,
14And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,
15And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
16And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, andBethshemesh with her suburbs;
nine cities out of those two tribes.
17And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,
18Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.
19All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.Joshua 21
484Joshua 21
20And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children
of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
21For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to bea city of refuge
for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,
22And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four cities.
23And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,
24Aijalon with her suburbs, Gath- rimmon with her suburbs; four cities.
25And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with
her suburbs; two cities.
26All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that
remained.
27And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half
tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to bea city of refuge for the
slayer; and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.
28And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,
29Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim with her suburbs; four cities.
30And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,
31Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.
32And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to bea city of refuge
for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.
33All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their
suburbs.
34And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe
of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,
35Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.
36And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,
37Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.
38And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to bea city of refuge for
the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
39Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in all.
40So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the
families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.
41All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and
eight cities with their suburbs.
42These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were all these cities.
43And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers;
and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.
485Joshua 21
44And the Lord gave them rest round about, according to all that he sware unto their fathers:
and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the Lord delivered all their en-
emies into their hand.
45There failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of
Israel; all came to pass.
486Joshua 21
Chapter 22
Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
2And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:
3Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of
the commandment of the Lord your God.
4And now the Lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them:
therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your possession,
which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you on the other side Jordan.
5But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of
the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep
his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with
all your soul.
6So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents.
7Now to the onehalf of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan:
but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan west-
ward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,
8And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very
much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much
raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.
9And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh
returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which isin the land of
Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
10And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that arein the land of Canaan, the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an
altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.
11And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children
of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan,
in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.
12And when the children of Israel heard of it,the whole congregation of the children of Israel
gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.
13And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad,
and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the
priest,
14And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel;
and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.Joshua 22
487Joshua 22
15And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the
half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,
16Thus saith the whole congregation of the Lord , What trespass isthis that ye have committed
against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the Lord , in that ye have
builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the Lord ?
17Isthe iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, al-
though there was a plague in the congregation of the Lord ,
18But that ye must turn away this day from following the Lord ? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the Lord , that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of
Israel.
19Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession beunclean, then pass ye over unto the
land of the possession of the Lord , wherein the Lord ’S tabernacle dwelleth, and take posses-
sion among us: but rebel not against the Lord , nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the Lord our God.
20Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell
on all the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
21Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh
answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel,
22The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it
bein rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord , (save us not this day,)
23That we have built us an altar to turn from following the Lord , or if to offer thereon burnt
offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require
it;
24And if we have not rather done it for fear of thisthing, saying, In time to come your children
might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel?
25For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and
children of Gad; ye have no part in the Lord : so shall your children make our children cease
from fearing the Lord .
26Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for
sacrifice:
27But that it may bea witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the Lord before him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices,
and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come,
Ye have no part in the Lord .
28Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to us or to our generations in
time to come, that we may say again, Behold the pattern of the altar of the Lord , which our
fathers made, not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it isa witness between us and
you.
488Joshua 22
29God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord , and turn this day from following the
Lord , to build an altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the
altar of the Lord our God that isbefore his tabernacle.
30And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation and heads of the
thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.
31And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the
children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we perceive that the Lord is
among us, because ye have not committed this trespass against the Lord : now ye have de-
livered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord .
32And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children
of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan,
to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.
33And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and
did not intend to go up against them in battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of
Reuben and Gad dwelt.
34And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar Ed:for it shall bea
witness between us that the Lord isGod.
489Joshua 22
Chapter 23
And it came to pass a long time after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel from all
their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old and stricken in age.
2And Joshua called for all Israel, andfor their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges,
and for their officers, and said unto them, I am old and stricken in age:
3And ye have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the Lord your God ishe that hath fought for you.
4Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for
your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea
westward.
5And the Lord your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive them from out of
your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the Lord your God hath promised unto you.
6Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law
of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom tothe right hand or tothe left;
7That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves
unto them:
8But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.
9For the Lord hath driven out from before you great nations and strong: but as foryou, no
man hath been able to stand before you unto this day.
10One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lord your God, he it isthat fighteth for
you, as he hath promised you.
11Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your God.
12Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these
that remain among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and
they to you:
13Know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive out any ofthese nations
from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides,
and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord your God
hath given you.
14And, behold, this day I amgoing the way of all the earth: and ye know in all your hearts
and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord
your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, andnot one thing hath failed
thereof.
15Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon you, which the Lord
your God promised you; so shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things, until he have des-
troyed you from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you.Joshua 23
490Joshua 23
16When ye have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your God, which he commanded
you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the
anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land
which he hath given unto you.
491Joshua 23
Chapter 24
And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel,
and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves
before God.
2And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt
on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father
of Nachor: and they served other gods.
3And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout
all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.
4And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but
Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
5I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did among
them: and afterward I brought you out.
6And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians
pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea.
7And when they cried unto the Lord , he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and
brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have seen what I have done
in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season.
8And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan;
and they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye might possess their land;
and I destroyed them from before you.
9Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against Israel, and sent and
called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:
10But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed you still: so I delivered you
out of his hand.
11And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against
you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Gir-
gashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.
12And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before you, even the two
kings of the Amorites; butnot with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
13And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities which ye built not,
and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.
14Now therefore fear the Lord , and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away
the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve
ye the Lord .
15And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , choose you this day whom ye will serve;
whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or theJoshua 24
492Joshua 24
gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord .
16And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord , to serve
other gods;
17For the Lord our God, he it isthat brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us
in all the way wherein we went, and among all the people through whom we passed:
18And the Lord drave out from before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in
the land: therefore will we also serve the Lord ; for he isour God.
19And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the Lord : for he isan holy God; he isa
jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins.
20If ye forsake the Lord , and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and
consume you, after that he hath done you good.
21And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the Lord .
22And Joshua said unto the people, Ye arewitnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen
you the Lord , to serve him. And they said, We arewitnesses.
23Now therefore put away, said he,the strange gods which areamong you, and incline your
heart unto the Lord God of Israel.
24And the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we
obey.
25So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordin-
ance in Shechem.
26And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone,
and set it up there under an oak, that was by the sanctuary of the Lord .
27And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it
hath heard all the words of the Lord which he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness
unto you, lest ye deny your God.
28So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.
29And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the
Lord , died, being an hundred and ten years old.
30And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which isin mount
Ephraim, on the north side of the hill of Gaash.
31And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived
Joshua, and which had known all the works of the Lord , that he had done for Israel.
32And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried
they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father
of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children
of Joseph.
493Joshua 24
33And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill that pertained toPhinehas
his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim.
494Joshua 24
The Book of
JudgesJudges
495Judges
Chapter 1
Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of Israel asked the Lord ,
saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight against them?
2And the Lord said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.
3And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight
against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with
him.
4And Judah went up; and the Lord delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their
hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
5And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the
Canaanites and the Perizzites.
6But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs
and his great toes.
7And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes
cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And
they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died.
8Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it
with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.
9And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites, that
dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the valley.
10And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron
before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
11And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before
was Kirjathsepher:
12And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah
my daughter to wife.
13And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it: and he gave him Achsah
his daughter to wife.
14And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a
field: and she lighted from off herass; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou?
15And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me
also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
16And the children of the Kenite, Moses’ father in law, went up out of the city of palm
trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of
Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people.
17And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited
Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.Judges 1
496Judges 1
18Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron
with the coast thereof.
19And the Lord was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could
not drive out the inhabitants ofthe valley, because they had chariots of iron.
20And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons
of Anak.
21And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem;
but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.
22And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the Lord was with
them.
23And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before wasLuz.)
24And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we
pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.
25And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge
of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family.
26And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name
thereof Luz: which isthe name thereof unto this day.
27Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants ofBethshean and her towns, nor
Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of
Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites
would dwell in that land.
28And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and
did not utterly drive them out.
29Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites
dwelt in Gezer among them.
30Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol;
but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.
31Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon,
nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:
32But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did
not drive them out.
33Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor the inhabitants
of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless
the inhabitants of Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.
34And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer
them to come down to the valley:
35But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand
of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.
497Judges 1
36And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim, from the rock, and
upward.
498Judges 1
Chapter 2
And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go
up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and
I said, I will never break my covenant with you.
2And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their
altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this?
3Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns
in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you.
4And it came to pass, when the angel of the Lord spake these words unto all the children of
Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
5And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the Lord .
6And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his
inheritance to possess the land.
7And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that
outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord , that he did for Israel.
8And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord , died, being an hundred and ten years
old.
9And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathheres, in the mount of
Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.
10And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another
generation after them, which knew not the Lord , nor yet the works which he had done for
Israel.
11And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord , and served Baalim:
12And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of
Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and
bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to anger.
13And they forsook the Lord , and served Baal and Ashtaroth.
14And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands
of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about,
so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
15Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord
had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed.
16Nevertheless the Lord raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those
that spoiled them.
17And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other
gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their
fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord ; butthey did not so.Judges 2
499Judges 2
18And when the Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and delivered
them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the Lord be-
cause of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.
19And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned, and corrupted themselves
more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them;
they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.
20And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people
hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened
unto my voice;
21I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left
when he died:
22That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord to walk
therein, as their fathers did keep it,or not.
23Therefore the Lord left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered
he them into the hand of Joshua.
500Judges 2
Chapter 3
Now these arethe nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of
Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;
2Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the
least such as before knew nothing thereof;
3Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the
Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baalhermon unto the entering in of
Hamath.
4And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the
commandments of the Lord , which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
5And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and
Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites:
6And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and
served their gods.
7And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord , and forgat the Lord their God,
and served Baalim and the groves.
8Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand
of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushan-
rishathaim eight years.
9And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord , the Lord raised up a deliverer to the
children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger
brother.
10And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and
the Lord delivered Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand
prevailed against Chushanrishathaim.
11And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.
12And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord : and the Lord
strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight
of the Lord .
13And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel,
and possessed the city of palm trees.
14So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
15But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord , the Lord raised them up a deliverer,
Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent
a present unto Eglon the king of Moab.
16But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it
under his raiment upon his right thigh.Judges 3
501Judges 3
17And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a very fat man.
18And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the
present.
19But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret
errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from
him.
20And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for
himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of
hisseat.
21And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it
into his belly:
22And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.
23Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him,
and locked them.
24When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of
the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.
25And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the doors of the
parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them: and, behold, their lord wasfallen down
dead on the earth.
26And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto
Seirath.
27And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Eph-
raim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them.
28And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the Lord hath delivered your enemies the
Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward
Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.
29And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of
valour; and there escaped not a man.
30So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore
years.
31And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred
men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.
502Judges 3
Chapter 4
And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord , when Ehud was dead.
2And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the
captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.
3And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord : for he had nine hundred chariots of iron;
and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel.
4And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
5And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in mount
Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.
6And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto
him, Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount
Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children
of Zebulun?
7And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with his
chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.
8And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but if thou wilt not go with
me, then I will not go.
9And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall
not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah
arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.
10And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand
men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.
11Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses,
had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which
isby Kedesh.
12And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.
13And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all
the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.
14And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this isthe day in which the Lord hath delivered
Sisera into thine hand: is not the Lord gone out before thee? So Barak went down from
mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.
15And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all hischariots, and all hishost, with the edge of the
sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off hischariot, and fled away on his feet.
16But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles:
and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.
17Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for
there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.Judges 4
503Judges 4
18And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me;
fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle.
19And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty. And
she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.
20Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth
come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.
21Then Jael Heber’s wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went
softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he
was fast asleep and weary. So he died.
22And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him,
Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her tent,
behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples.
23So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.
24And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of
Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.
504Judges 4
Chapter 5
Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying,
2Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.
3Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto the Lord ; I will sing praise
to the Lord God of Israel.
4Lord , when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the
earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.
5The mountains melted from before the Lord , even that Sinai from before the Lord God of
Israel.
6In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied,
and the travellers walked through byways.
7The inhabitants ofthe villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that
I arose a mother in Israel.
8They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among
forty thousand in Israel?
9My heart istoward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Bless ye the Lord .
10Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.
11They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall
they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord , even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants
of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.
12Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity
captive, thou son of Abinoam.
13Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the
Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.
14Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among
thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the
pen of the writer.
15And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak: he was sent
on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.
16Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divi-
sions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
17Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the
sea shore, and abode in his breaches.
18Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high
places of the field.Judges 5
505Judges 5
19The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of
Megiddo; they took no gain of money.
20They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
21The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul,
thou hast trodden down strength.
22Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their
mighty ones.
23Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord , curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because
they came not to the help of the Lord , to the help of the Lord against the mighty.
24Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above
women in the tent.
25He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
26She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the
hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through
his temples.
27At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed,
there he fell down dead.
28The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his
chariot solong in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots?
29Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,
30Have they not sped? have they notdivided the prey; to every man a damsel ortwo; to Sisera
a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needle-
work on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?
31So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord : but letthem that love him beas the sun when he
goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.
506Judges 5
Chapter 6
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord : and the Lord delivered them
into the hand of Midian seven years.
2And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: andbecause of the Midianites the children
of Israel made them the dens which arein the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.
3And soit was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and
the children of the east, even they came up against them;
4And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come
unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
5For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for mul-
titude; forboth they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land
to destroy it.
6And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel
cried unto the Lord .
7And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord because of the
Midianites,
8That the Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith
the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house
of bondage;
9And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that op-
pressed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land;
10And I said unto you, I amthe Lord your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose
land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.
11And there came an angel of the Lord , and sat under an oak which wasin Ophrah, that
pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress,
to hide itfrom the Midianites.
12And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The Lord iswith thee,
thou mighty man of valour.
13And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen
us? and where beall his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring
us up from Egypt? but now the Lord hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the Midianites.
14And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel
from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?
15And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family is
poor in Manasseh, and I amthe least in my father’s house.Judges 6
507Judges 6
16And the Lord said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites
as one man.
17And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that
thou talkest with me.
18Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set
itbefore thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.
19And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of
flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought itout unto him
under the oak, and presented it.
20And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay
them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so.
21Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and
touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and
consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of
his sight.
22And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord , Gideon said, Alas, O Lord
GOD! for because I have seen an angel of the Lord face to face.
23And the Lord said unto him, Peace beunto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.
24Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord , and called it Jehovahshalom: unto this
day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
25And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him, Take thy father’s
young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal
that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that isby it:
26And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place,
and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which
thou shalt cut down.
27Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord had said unto him: and so
it was, because he feared his father’s household, and the men of the city, that he could not
do itby day, that he did itby night.
28And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal
was cast down, and the grove was cut down that wasby it, and the second bullock was offered
upon the altar that was built.
29And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and
asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.
30Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he
hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it.
508Judges 6
31And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him?
he that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yetmorning: if he bea god, let
him plead for himself, because onehath cast down his altar.
32Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because
he hath thrown down his altar.
33Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered
together, and went over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel.
34But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abiezer was
gathered after him.
35And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was gathered after him: and
he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up
to meet them.
36And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said,
37Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it
bedry upon all the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said.
38And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and
wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water.
39And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but
this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon
the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.
40And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all
the ground.
509Judges 6
Chapter 7
Then Jerubbaal, who isGideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early,
and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north
side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
2And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people that arewith thee aretoo many for me to give
the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own
hand hath saved me.
3Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever isfearful and
afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people
twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand.
4And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people areyet toomany; bring them down unto the
water, and I will try them for thee there: and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This
shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This
shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.
5So he brought down the people unto the water: and the Lord said unto Gideon, Every one
that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself;
likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.
6And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, were three hundred
men: but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.
7And the Lord said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and
deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people go every man unto his
place.
8So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent all the rest ofIsrael
every man unto his tent, and retained those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was
beneath him in the valley.
9And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him, Arise, get thee down
unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand.
10But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host:
11And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands be strengthened to go
down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the
armed men that were in the host.
12And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the
valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand
by the sea side for multitude.
13And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow,
and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host
of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along.Judges 7
510Judges 7
14And his fellow answered and said, This isnothing else save the sword of Gideon the son
of Joash, a man of Israel: forinto his hand hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.
15And it was so,when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation
thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the
Lord hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.
16And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put a trumpet in
every man’s hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.
17And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the
outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do.
18When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that arewith me, then blow ye the trumpets also
on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of the Lord , and of Gideon.
19So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside of the
camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they
blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.
20And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps
in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The
sword of the Lord , and of Gideon.
21And they stood every man in his place round about the camp: and all the host ran, and
cried, and fled.
22And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the Lord set every man’s sword against
his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to
the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.
23And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher,
and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites.
24And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down
against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. Then
all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah
and Jordan.
25And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon
the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought
the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.
511Judges 7
Chapter 8
And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst
us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.
2And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Isnot the gleaning
of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
3God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was
I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had
said that.
4And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men that
were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.
5And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people
that follow me; for they befaint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of
Midian.
6And the princes of Succoth said, Arethe hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine
hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
7And Gideon said, Therefore when the Lord hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine
hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.
8And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel
answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.
9And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break
down this tower.
10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen
thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an
hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.
11And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and
Jogbehah, and smote the host: for the host was secure.
12And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of
Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.
13And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun was up,
14And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him: and he described
unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.
15And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom
ye did upbraid me, saying, Arethe hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that
we should give bread unto thy men that areweary?
16And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them
he taught the men of Succoth.
17And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.Judges 8
512Judges 8
18Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye
slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art,so were they; each one resembled the children
of a king.
19And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: asthe Lord liveth, if ye
had saved them alive, I would not slay you.
20And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, andslay them. But the youth drew not his sword:
for he feared, because he was yet a youth.
21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man is, so ishis
strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments
that were on their camels’ necks.
22Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son,
and thy son’s son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian.
23And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you:
the Lord shall rule over you.
24And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me
every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmael-
ites.)
25And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast
therein every man the earrings of his prey.
26And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred
shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of
Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels’ necks.
27And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah: and all Israel
went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.
28Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their
heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon.
29And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.
30And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives.
31And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he called
Abimelech.
32And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre
of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
33And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again,
and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baalberith their god.
34And the children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them
out of the hands of all their enemies on every side:
35Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon, according to all
the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.
513Judges 8
Chapter 9
And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother’s brethren, and
communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother’s father, saying,
2Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either
that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which arethreescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that
one reign over you? remember also that I amyour bone and your flesh.
3And his mother’s brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these
words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said, He isour brother.
4And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baalberith,
wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him.
5And he went unto his father’s house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal,
being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest
son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.
6And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and went, and
made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar that was in Shechem.
7And when they told itto Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and
lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem,
that God may hearken unto you.
8The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive tree,
Reign thou over us.
9But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour
God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
10And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.
11But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and
go to be promoted over the trees?
12Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.
13And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and
go to be promoted over the trees?
14Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.
15And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come
and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour
the cedars of Lebanon.
16Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king,
and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according
to the deserving of his hands;
17(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the
hand of Midian:Judges 9
514Judges 9
18And ye are risen up against my father’s house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore
and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant,
king over the men of Shechem, because he isyour brother;)
19If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then
rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you:
20But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the
house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo,
and devour Abimelech.
21And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech
his brother.
22When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel,
23Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men
of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech:
24That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their
blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem,
which aided him in the killing of his brethren.
25And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they
robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech.
26And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the
men of Shechem put their confidence in him.
27And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and
made merry, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed
Abimelech.
28And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who isAbimelech, and who isShechem, that we should
serve him? isnot hethe son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor
the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him?
29And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech.
And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.
30And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his
anger was kindled.
31And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and
his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thee.
32Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that iswith thee, and lie in wait in the
field:
33And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set
upon the city: and, behold, when he and the people that iswith him come out against thee,
then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.
515Judges 9
34And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they laid
wait against Shechem in four companies.
35And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and
Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from lying in wait.
36And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from
the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains
as if they were men.
37And Gaal spake again and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land,
and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.
38Then said Zebul unto him, Where isnow thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who is
Abimelech, that we should serve him? isnot this the people that thou hast despised? go out,
I pray now, and fight with them.
39And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.
40And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown and
wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.
41And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they
should not dwell in Shechem.
42And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and they told
Abimelech.
43And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field,
and looked, and, behold, the people were come forth out of the city; and he rose up against
them, and smote them.
44And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward, and stood in the
entering of the gate of the city: and the two other companies ran upon all the people that
were in the fields, and slew them.
45And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the
people that was therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.
46And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold
of the house of the god Berith.
47And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.
48And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him;
and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it,
and laid iton his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen
me do, make haste, and do as I have done.
49And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and
put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower
of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.
50Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.
516Judges 9
51But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, and
all they of the city, and shut itto them, and gat them up to the top of the tower.
52And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the door
of the tower to burn it with fire.
53And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech’s head, and all to brake
his skull.
54Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw
thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And his young man
thrust him through, and he died.
55And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto
his place.
56Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in
slaying his seventy brethren:
57And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them
came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.
517Judges 9
Chapter 10
And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo,
a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.
2And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir.
3And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years.
4And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are
called Havothjair unto this day, which arein the land of Gilead.
5And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.
6And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord , and served Baalim,
and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the
gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the Lord , and
served not him.
7And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the
Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon.
8And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel: eighteen years, all the children
of Israel that were on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which isin Gilead.
9Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and
against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed.
10And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord , saying, We have sinned against thee,
both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.
11And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians,
and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines?
12The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried
to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.
13Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver you no more.
14Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulation.
15And the children of Israel said unto the Lord , We have sinned: do thou unto us
whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.
16And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord : and his soul
was grieved for the misery of Israel.
17Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the
children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.
18And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is hethat will begin
to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.Judges 10
518Judges 10
Chapter 11
Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he wasthe son of an harlot:
and Gilead begat Jephthah.
2And Gilead’s wife bare him sons; and his wife’s sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah,
and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father’s house; for thou artthe son of a
strange woman.
3Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered
vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.
4And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against
Israel.
5And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of
Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob:
6And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children
of Ammon.
7And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my
father’s house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?
8And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that
thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over all
the inhabitants of Gilead.
9And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the
children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver them before me, shall I be your head?
10And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The Lord be witness between us, if we do
not so according to thy words.
11Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain
over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.
12And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What
hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land?
13And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because
Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok,
and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.
14And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon:
15And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the
land of the children of Ammon:
16But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red
sea, and came to Kadesh;Judges 11
519Judges 11
17Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass
through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they
sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.
18Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the
land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side
of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.
19And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and
Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place.
20But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people
together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
21And the Lord God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and
they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that
country.
22And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and
from the wilderness even unto Jordan.
23So now the Lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel,
and shouldest thou possess it?
24Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever
the Lord our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess.
25And now artthou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he
ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them,
26While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the
cities that bealong by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not
recover them within that time?
27Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me:
the Lord the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of
Ammon.
28Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah
which he sent him.
29Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and
Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over
unto the children of Ammon.
30And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord , and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the
children of Ammon into mine hands,
31Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when
I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord ’S, and I will offer it
up for a burnt offering.
520Judges 11
32So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the
Lord delivered them into his hands.
33And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and
unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon
were subdued before the children of Israel.
34And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to
meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was hisonly child; beside her he had
neither son nor daughter.
35And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter!
thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened
my mouth unto the Lord , and I cannot go back.
36And she said unto him, My father, ifthou hast opened thy mouth unto the Lord , do to
me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath
taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.
37And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that
I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.
38And he said, Go. And he sent her away fortwo months: and she went with her companions,
and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.
39And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did
with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a
custom in Israel,
40That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite
four days in a year.
521Judges 11
Chapter 12
And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said
unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and
didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.
2And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of
Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands.
3And when I saw that ye delivered menot, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against
the children of Ammon, and the Lord delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye
come up unto me this day, to fight against me?
4Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the
men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites arefugitives of Ephraim
among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.
5And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so,that
when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead
said unto him, Artthou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;
6Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame
to pronounce itright. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there
fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.
7And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in
one ofthe cities of Gilead.
8And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
9And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad, and took in thirty
daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.
10Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.
11And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.
12And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun.
13And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel.
14And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and
he judged Israel eight years.
15And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land
of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.Judges 12
522Judges 12
Chapter 13
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord ; and the Lord delivered
them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
2And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was
Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.
3And the angel of the Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou
artbarren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.
4Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any
unclean thing:
5For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin to deliver Israel out
of the hand of the Philistines.
6Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me,
and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible: but I asked
him not whence he was, neither told he me his name:
7But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine
nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from
the womb to the day of his death.
8Then Manoah intreated the Lord , and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou
didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be
born.
9And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the
woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her.
10And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold,
the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the other day.
11And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, Art
thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I am.
12And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order the child, and
how shall we do unto him?
13And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her
beware.
14She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong
drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all that I commanded her let her observe.
15And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord , I pray thee, let us detain thee, until we
shall have made ready a kid for thee.Judges 13
523Judges 13
16And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy
bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord . For Manoah
knew not that he was an angel of the Lord .
17And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord , What isthy name, that when thy sayings
come to pass we may do thee honour?
18And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it
is secret?
19So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered itupon a rock unto the Lord : and
the angel did wondrously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.
20For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the
angel of the Lord ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on
it,and fell on their faces to the ground.
21But the angel of the Lord did no more appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah
knew that he was an angel of the Lord .
22And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.
23But his wife said unto him, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received
a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these
things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these.
24And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the
Lord blessed him.
25And the Spirit of the Lord began to move him at times in the camp of Dan between Zorah
and Eshtaol.
524Judges 13
Chapter 14
And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of
the Philistines.
2And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in
Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife.
3Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman among the daughters
of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised
Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.
4But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord , that he sought an occasion
against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.
5Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the
vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him.
6And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent
a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had
done.
7And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well.
8And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the
lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion.
9And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother,
and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out
of the carcase of the lion.
10So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used
the young men to do.
11And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with
him.
12And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: if ye can certainly
declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find itout, then I will give you thirty
sheets and thirty change of garments:
13But if ye cannot declare itme, then shall ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of
garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.
14And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle.
15And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson’s wife, Entice thy
husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father’s house
with fire: have ye called us to take that we have? is itnot so?Judges 14
525Judges 14
